AIP 97. Academic Internship (2, 4)
Individual placements for field learning. Must be integrated with an academic discipline. A written contract involving all parties will include learning objectives, a paper/project outline, and means of supervision and progress evaluation. May be taken for credit up to three times. Prerequisites: lower-division standing, completion of thirty units of UC San Diego undergraduate study, a minimum UC San Diego GPA of 3.0, and a completed and approved Learning Agreement for Special Studies.

AIP 197. Academic Internship Program (2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12)
Individual internship placements integrated with an academic discipline. A written contract involving all parties will include learning objectives, a paper/project outline, and means of supervision and progress evaluation. Consent of faculty adviser and program chair required. May be taken for credit up to three times for a maximum of sixteen units. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; department approval.

AIP 197DC. UCDC: Washington, DC Internship (6, 8, 10)
This internship is attached to the University of California, Washington Center programs. Students participating in the campus UCDC program secure internships in the Washington, DC area requiring 18–30 hours per week. Students must be enrolled in the UCDC program. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; department approval.

AIP 197P. Public Service Internship (4, 8, 12)
Individual placements for field learning performed in nonprofit organizations or government agencies dedicated to providing services in the areas of education, government, social issues, and health. May be taken for credit up to three times for a maximum of twelve units. Contract completed prior to start of internship will include intellectually unified expectations and means of supervision. Faculty member and student will meet regularly. Prerequisites: ninety units completed; 2.5 minimum cumulative GPA; department approval.

AIP 197T. Academic Internship Program—Special Programs (2)
Individual placements for field learning associated with UC San Diego partnerships and special programs. A written contract involving all parties will include learning objectives, a paper/project outline, and means of supervision and progress evaluation. Consent of faculty adviser and program chair required. Prerequisites: ninety units minimum completed; 2.5 minimum cumulative GPA; department approval.

AAS 10. Introduction to African American Studies (4)
This course will cover the experiences of peoples of African descent in the U.S. and broader African Diaspora from the vantage points of cultural production, political practice, socioeconomic conditions, and the overall struggle for social justice along intersecting lines of race, gender, and class. Topics reviewed include slavery (and slave rebellion), Reconstruction, Jim Crow apartheid, the Great Migration and Harlem Renaissance, and the Civil Rights and Black Power Movements.

AAS 11. Introduction to Black Diasporic Studies (4)
This course is focused on foundational readings, theories, research, and scholarship regarding the Black Diaspora. This course will provide students with foundational knowledge of the field, seminal works, and theoretical and conceptual frameworks that influence research and scholarship in this area of study.

AAS 14. Introduction to African Studies (4)
This course is focused on foundational readings, theories, research, and scholarship regarding African Studies. This course will provide students with foundational knowledge of the field, seminal works, and theoretical and conceptual frameworks that influence research and scholarship in this area of study.

AAS 15. Racism and Global Imperialism (4)
This course will provide a foundation in history, theory, and research on the political, institutional, and structural components of race and racism in a global context. This course will provide an overview of complexities embedded in attempts to understand historical origins and current reverberations of colonization, imperialism, and racism in the United States and other global communities.

AAS 87. First-year Student Seminar (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to 15-20 students. Enrollment priority will be given to first-year students. Seminars are open to sophomores, juniors and seniors on a space available basis. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit four times.

AAS 170. Legacies of Research on Disenfranchised Communities (4)
Students will learn about the historic and current legacies of scientific research and the convergence(s) between science and society as a mechanism for colonization and imperialism.

AAS 171. Service Learning in Non-Profits (4)
Students will work with nonprofit organizations to support Black communities in San Diego while learning about nonprofit organizations.

AAS 172. Scholarly Practicum (4)
Students will work with a chosen UC San Diego or UC faculty member on the faculty member’s scholarship. The terms of the work will be agreed upon by the faculty member, the student, and the BDAAS director. At the end of the quarter, the student will submit a brief report on how they supported the faculty member and how the scholarship relates to their major.

AAS 179. Capstone for Black and African American Studies (4)
Students will meet collectively to work on individual scholarly projects with an instructor’s guidance and supervision. Students can only take the capstone course once they have completed their upper-division course work, or as they complete their courses while simultaneously taking the capstone course.

AAS/ANSC 185. #BlackLivesMatter (4)
(Cross-listed with ANSC 185.) This seminar traces the historical roots and growth of the Black Lives Matter social movement in the United States and comparative global contexts. Occupy Wall Street, protests against the prison industrial complex, black feminist, and LGBTQ intersectionality are explored in the context of millennial and postmillennial youth as the founders of this movement. Students may not receive credit for AAS 185 and ANSC 185.

AAS 190. Special Topics in African American Studies (1–4)
This course will explore specialized, relevant topics in the field of African American studies. Course topics will vary from quarter to quarter, so it may be repeated up to three times as long as the quarterly topics vary.

AAS 198. Directed Group Study in African American Studies (2 or 4)
Directed group study on a topic or in a field not included in the regular curriculum by special arrangement with a faculty member. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing unless otherwise authorized. Completion of ninety units of undergraduate study, and completion and approval of the Special Studies form.

AAS 199. Independent Study in African American Studies (2 or 4)
Individual research and study on a particular subject related to African American studies by special arrangement with and under the direction of a faculty member. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Enrollment via the faculty director of the Black Diaspora and African American Studies program only.

AWP 3. Analytical Writing (4)
AWP 3 provides writers the opportunity to develop their critical thinking and writing abilities. At the end of AWP 3, students will produce a portfolio of work that will determine their readiness to enter the college writing programs. Replaced AWP 1. Students may take AWP 3, AWP 1, and ELWR 1 for a combined total of three times to earn a passing grade of C or better to satisfy the UC Entry Level Writing Requirement.

AWP 4A. Analytical Writing and Academic English A (4)
AWP 4A is the first of a two-quarter sequence designed to offer students who need extra English language support and/or more time to develop their critical thinking and writing abilities. Students who enroll in AWP 4A are required to enroll in AWP 4B in the subsequent quarter. Pass/Not Pass only. Replaced AWP 2A. Students may not receive credit for AWP 4A and AWP 2A or ELWR 2A. Students must earn a grade of Pass to move on to AWP 4B.

AWP 4B. Analytical Writing and Academic English B (4)
AWP 4B is the second of a two-quarter sequence designed to offer students who need extra English language support and/or more time to develop their critical thinking and writing abilities. At the end of AWP 4B, students will produce a portfolio of work that will determine their readiness to enter the college writing programs. Replaced AWP 2B. Students may not receive credit for AWP 4B and AWP 2B or ELWR 2B. Students must earn a grade of C or better in AWP 4B to satisfy the UC Entry Level Writing Requirement. If a grade of C or better is not earned, students are placed in AWP 3. Prerequisites: AWP 4A.

AWP 10. Language and Learning in the American Academy (4)
This analytical writing course provides students a critical lens through which they can explore debates about identity, language, and learning in higher education. In this course, students engage in critical thinking, reading, and writing practices necessary for success in the American academy. Students may not receive credit for AWP 10 and AWP 10R.

AWP 10R. Language and Learning in the American Academy (4)
This remote analytical writing course provides students a critical lens through which they can explore debates about identity, language, and learning in higher education. In this course, students engage in critical thinking, reading, and writing practices necessary for success in the American academy. Students may not receive credit for AWP 10 and AWP 10R.

AWP 100. Writing a Researched Argument (4)
This course offers students intensive instruction in the critical and rhetorical practices necessary to craft strong, research-informed arguments. Students also make short multi-modal presentations to practice delivering what they have written. Course topics will vary. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing.

AWP 101. Writing about Science (4)
Students write about scientific topics for non-scientific audiences, engaging with current debates in the sciences, analyzing the rhetorical strategies employed, and composing rhetorically strategic responses of their own. Students also make short multi-modal presentations to practice delivering what they have written. The intensive focus on writing and revising is especially useful for students who want to develop their writing. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing.

AWP 102. Writing for the Professions (4)
Students use writing to explore and to create a professional identity. Assignments range from articulating the questions and problems that students hope to explore in their professional lives to understanding the current conversations in their chosen professions, and to fashioning resumes, cover letters, and presentations that declare what they hope to contribute professionally. The intensive focus on writing and revising is especially useful for students who want to develop their writing. Students may not receive credits for AWP 102 and AWP 102R. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing.

AWP 102R. Writing for the Professions (4)
In this remote course, students use writing to explore and to create a professional identity. Assignments range from articulating the questions and problems that students hope to explore in their professional lives to understanding the current conversations in their chosen professions, and to fashioning resumes, cover letters, and presentations that declare what they hope to contribute professionally. The intensive focus on writing and revising is especially useful for students who want to develop their writing. Students may not receive credits for AWP 102 and AWP 102R. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing.

AWP 103. Writing about the Law (4)
Students write about legal topics for a general audience. Students will examine the rhetorical strategies employed by various stakeholders in controversial Supreme Court cases. They will then weigh in, composing their own strategic arguments. Students will also make short multi-modal presentations to practice delivering what they have written. The intensive focus on writing and revising is especially useful for students who want to develop their writing. This course fulfills the undergraduate Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) requirement. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing.

AAPI 87. First-year Seminar (1)
The First-year Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year seminars can be offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter.

ASTR 1. Stars and Black Holes (4)
An introduction to the evolution of stars, including their birth and death. Topics include the movements of objects in the night sky, gravity and motion, how light and matter interact, stellar birth, stellar evolution, white dwarfs, neutron stars, black holes, and general relativity.

ASTR 2. Galaxies and the Universe (4)
An introduction to galaxies and cosmology. Topics include gravity and motion, atomic structure and light, the Milky Way, galaxy types and distances, dark matter, large scale structure, the expansion of the universe, dark energy, and the early universe.

ASTR 3. Planetary Systems Near and Far (4)
An exploration of planetary systems in the nearby universe. Topics include planet formation, gas giants, ice giants, terrestrial worlds, including super earths and dwarf planets, asteroids and comets, moons, and planet habitability. The solar system will be discussed in the context of our knowledge of other planetary systems.

ASTR 4. Life in the Universe (4)
An exploration of life inside and outside of the solar system. Topics include the definition of life, the origination and development of life on earth, evolution and genetics, life in extreme environments, how to identify life on other worlds, the basics of deep space exploration, planet habitability, searching for extraterrestrial intelligence, and the latest research in astrobiology.

ASTR 10. Astronomy and Civilization (4)
Throughout history the mysteries of the night sky have driven humans to pursue a deeper understanding of how the universe works. This course will examine various ways in which astronomical ideas influenced the development of science and civilization from pre-history to the present day. Topics will include archeoastronomy, the development of timekeeping, celestial navigation, the role of astronomy in cultures throughout the world, including indigenous cultures, and the development of scientific theories of the universe.

ASTR 15. Astronomy in Science Fiction (4)
Survey of current topics in astrophysics from the perspective of astronomy in science fiction. The course will consist of readings in selected science fiction novels, watching relevant films, companion readings in an introductory astronomy text, and critical analysis and discussion.

ASTR 18. Additional Topics in Classical Physics (4)
This course explores topics in classical physics with the intent of preparing students from the Physics 2 sequence for upper-division astronomy and astrophysics major courses. Topics include energy methods, rotational motion, coupled oscillators, waves in continua, basic fluids, hydrostatics, Maxwell’s equations, electromagnetic waves and radiation, optics, thermodynamics, and acoustics. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A or PHYS 2AR and PHYS 2B and PHYS 2C and PHYS 2D.

ASTR 20A. Introduction to Astrophysics I (4)
First course in a two-quarter sequence of an introduction to astrophysics. This course covers the formation and evolution of stars and their planetary systems. Topics include telescopes, measuring distances to and masses of stars, thermal radiation and stellar spectra, energy generation in stars, stellar evolution, variable stars, orbital dynamics, the solar system, planetary atmospheres, and exoplanets. Prerequisites: MATH 20A-B-C, PHYS 2A/2AR-B or 4A-B.

ASTR 20B. Introduction to Astrophysics II (4)
Second course in a two-quarter sequence of an introduction to astrophysics. This course covers galaxies and cosmology. Topics include the Milky Way galaxy, star formation and the interstellar medium, galaxies, galaxy evolution, black holes, quasars, dark matter, the expansion of the universe, large-scale structure, cosmology, the early universe, and the big bang. Prerequisites: ASTR 20A.

ASTR 101. Astrophysical Dynamics (4)
Classical dynamics with an emphasis on astrophysical applications. Topics include: extremization, Lagrangian mechanics, symmetry and conservation, two-body problem, Kepler’s laws, stellar dynamics: epicycles, Lindblad resonance, virial theorem and applications, coupled oscillators, modes, waves in continua, acoustic waves, and Jeans instability. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A or PHYS 2AR or PHYS 4A and PHYS 2B or PHYS 4B and PHYS 2C or PHYS 4C and PHYS 2D or PHYS 4D and PHYS 2D or PHYS 4E and MATH 18 or MATH 31AH and MATH 20E.

ASTR 102. Electrodynamics and Optics for Astrophysicists (4)
Electrodynamics and optics with an emphasis on astrophysical applications. Topics include Maxwell’s equations in vacuum and media, applications; electromagnetic waves, Poynting theorem, waves in media; waveguides, resonators, solution of PDEs by separation; Fermat’s principle, geometrical optics, lenses with introduction to gravitational lensing; physical optics, diffraction (Fresnel and Fraunhofer), and interference. Prerequisites: ASTR 101.

ASTR 103. Dynamics of Radiation and Fluids (4)
Electromagnetic radiation and topics in fluid dynamics with an emphasis on astrophysical applications. Topics include special relativity, radiation: multipole expansion, Lienard-Wiechert formulation, radiation from relativistic charges; electromagnetic scattering, topics in radiation processes, introductory fluids, Euler and Navier-Stokes equations, potential flow and induced mass, vorticity, convection and Schwarzchild criterion, and turbulence. Prerequisites: ASTR 102.

ASTR 120. Stellar Astrophysics (4)
In-depth exploration of stellar astrophysics. Radiation and energy transport in interiors and atmospheres of stars. Equations of stellar structure. Basics of stellar modeling. Star formation, stellar evolution as a function of stellar mass, initial mass functions, stellar clusters. Properties of variable stars, late-stage stellar evolutionary processes. Nucleosynthesis, demographics of stellar remnants. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A/2AR-B-C-D or 4A-B-C-D-E.

ASTR 123. Galaxies (4)
An in-depth exploration of the structure and properties of galaxies in the universe. Topics covered include the Milky Way, the interstellar medium, properties of spiral and elliptical galaxies, rotation curves, starburst galaxies, galaxy formation and evolution, large-scale structure, and active galaxies and quasars. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A/2AR-B-C-D or 4A-B-C-D-E.

ASTR 124. Exoplanets (4)
Broad exploration of topics related to (exo)planetary systems. Topics will include planet detection techniques, planet demographics, planet formation, dynamical interactions and evolution of planet-disk and planet-planet systems, terrestrial planet geology, atmospheres and atmospheric processes, and planetary spectroscopy. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A/2AR-B-C-D or 4A-B-C-D-E.

ASTR 150. Observational Optical Research Lab (5)
Laboratory course to provide students with hands-on experience working with astronomical data taken at optical wavelengths of light. Topics include detection of optical light, photon counting statistics, detectors and noise, probability distributions, spectroscopy, optical telescopes, photometry, astrometry, display of scientific data, and scientific writing. A significant portion of the class includes computer programming for data analysis. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A or PHYS 2AR or PHYS 4A and PHYS 2B or PHYS 4B and PHYS 2C or PHYS 4C and PHYS 2D or PHYS 4D and PHYS 2D or PHYS 4E and BILD 62 or COGS 18 or CSE 11 or CSE 6R or CSE 8A or CSE 8B or DSC 10 or PHYS 41.

BILD 1. The Cell (4)
An introduction to cellular structure and function, to biological molecules, bioenergetics, to the genetics of both prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms, and to the elements of molecular biology. Recommended preparation: prior completion of high school- or college-level chemistry course.

BILD 2. Multicellular Life (4)
An introduction to the development and the physiological processes of plants and animals. Included are treatments of reproduction, nutrition, respiration, transport systems, regulation of the internal environment, the nervous system, and behavior. Prerequisites: BILD 1.

BILD 3. Organismic and Evolutionary Biology (4)
The first principles of evolutionary theory, classification, ecology, and behavior; a phylogenetic synopsis of the major groups of organisms from viruses to primates.

BILD 4. Introductory Biology Lab (2)
Students gain hands-on experience and learn the theoretical basis of lab techniques common to a variety of biological disciplines such as biochemistry, molecular biology, cell biology, and bioinformatics. Students will work in groups, learning how to collect, analyze, and present data while using the scientific method to conduct inquiry-based laboratory experiments. Material lab fees will apply.

BILD 5. Data Analysis and Design for Biologists (4)
This course is a practical introduction to information literacy, experimental design, and data analysis for biologists. Students will be introduced to coding, data management, and quantitative analysis. However, this is not a traditional statistics course and no mathematics prerequisites are required. Rather this course focuses on practical skills related to effectively asking and answering biological questions with data.

BILD 7. The Beginning of Life (4)
An introduction to the basic principles of plant and animal development, emphasizing the similar strategies by which diverse organisms develop. Practical applications of developmental principles as well as ethical considerations arising from these technologies will be discussed.

BILD 10. Fundamental Concepts of Modern Biology (4)
An introduction to the biochemistry and genetics of cells and organisms; illustrations are drawn from microbiology and human biology. This course is designed for nonbiology students and does not satisfy a lower-division requirement for any biology major. Open to nonbiology majors only. Note: Students may not receive credit for BILD 10 after receiving credit for BILD 1.

BILD 12. Neurobiology and Behavior (4)
Introduction to the organization and functions of the nervous system; topics include molecular, cellular, developmental, systems, and behavioral neurobiology. This course is designed for nonbiology students and does not satisfy a lower-division requirement for any biology major. Open to nonbiology majors only. Note: Students may not receive credit for both BILD 12 and COGS 17.

BILD 18. Human Impact on the Environment (4)
Course will focus on issues such as global warming, species extinction, and human impact on the oceans and forests. History and scientific projections will be examined in relation to these events. Possible solutions to these worldwide processes and a critical assessment of their causes and consequences will be covered.

BILD 20. Human Genetics in Modern Society (4)
Fundamentals of human genetics and introduction to modern genetic technology such as gene cloning and DNA finger printing. Applications of these techniques, such as forensic genetics, genetic screening, and genetic engineering. Social impacts and ethical implications of these applications. This course is designed for nonbiology students and does not satisfy a lower-division requirement for any biology major. Open to nonbiology majors only. Note: Students may not receive credit for BILD 20 after receiving credit for BICD 100.

BILD 22. Human Nutrition (4)
A survey of our understanding of the basic chemistry and biology of human nutrition; discussions of all aspects of food: nutritional value, diet, nutritional diseases, public health, and public policy. This course is designed for nonbiology students and does not satisfy a lower-division requirement for any biology major. Open to nonbiology majors only. Note: Students may not receive credit for BILD 22 after receiving credit for BIBC 120.

BILD 26. Human Physiology (4)
Introduction to the elements of human physiology and the functioning of the various organ systems. The course presents a broad, yet detailed, analysis of human physiology, with particular emphasis toward understanding disease processes. This course is designed for nonbiology students and does not satisfy a lower-division requirement for any biology major. Open to nonbiology majors only. Note: Students may not receive credit for BILD 26 after receiving credit for BIPN 100.

BILD 28. Immunology, Vaccines, and Immunotherapy (4)
Course will provide an overview of the human immune system and how it is exploited to improve human health. Designed for nonbiology majors who want to better understand exciting medical interventions developed in recent years. Course will cover the new SARS-2 vaccine and revolutionary cancer treatments, based on the fundamental understanding of how the immune system fights infection. Discussions will include how the immune system is studied and will “bust” common myths about the immune system. Note: Students will not receive credit if taken after BICD 140.

BILD 30. Biology of Plagues: Past and Present (4)
An introduction to diseases caused by viruses, bacteria, and parasites, and the impact of these diseases on human society. Topics include the biology of infectious disease, epidemiology, and promising new methods to fight disease. Open to nonbiology majors only. Note: Students will not receive credit for BILD 30 if taken after BIMM 120.

BILD 32. Introduction to Cancer Biology (4)
Cancer is the second leading cause of death both in the United States and globally. This course is an introduction to the basic biology of cancer including the cellular and genetic changes that characterize the development and progression of cancer, as well as a review of the major therapies currently being pursued to treat cancer. Topics that are emphasized in this course include the fundamental causes of cancers, the socioeconomic implications of cancer incidence, and basic preventative measures. This course does not satisfy any requirement for a biology major. Students may not receive credit for BILD 32 after receiving credit for BIMM 134.

BILD 36. AIDS Science and Society (4)
An introduction to all aspects of the AIDS epidemic. Topics will include the epidemiology, biology, and clinical aspects of HIV infection; HIV testing; education and approaches to therapy; and the social, political, and legal impacts of AIDS on the individual and society. This course is designed for nonbiology students and does not satisfy a lower-division requirement for any biology major. Open to nonbiology majors only. Note: Students may not receive credit for BILD 36 after receiving credit for BICD 136.

BILD 38. Dementia, Science, and Society (4)
Introduction to basic human neuroscience leading to a discussion of brain diseases classified under the rubric Dementia. Topics include basic brain structure and function, diseases of the aging brain and their economic, social, political and ethical impacts on society.

BILD 40. Introduction to Biomedical Research (2)
Course introduces students to some of the research approaches employed by physicians and scientists at the UC San Diego School of Medicine to investigate the etiology, biology, prevention and treatment of human diseases, including cancer, diabetes, and others. P/NP grades only.

BILD 42. Our Sustainable Future (4)
This course will provide an overview of existing methods for energy, food, and materials production and utilization, and describe new technologies for their sustainable production and the consequences of this to our society and the planet.

BILD 44. Scientific Perspectives for a Changing World (4)
Science can help us define and solve problems of the modern world, from how to improve health and change people’s behavior to how to protect the environment. This course will train students to assess scientific claims and their implications in today’s complex information ecosystem, critically engaging from the scale of data analysis through to the social framework in which research is carried out and presented. Contemporary case studies from natural and social sciences will be discussed.

BILD 46. Ecology of a Changing Planet (4)
Biodiversity is changing worldwide in response to global changes. What do these changes in biodiversity foretell for the continued provisioning of ecosystem services on which humans depend? How can we develop conservation and management strategies that preserve biodiversity, backed up by sound science? These are some of the most important questions of our time. Topics will be presented at an introductory level appropriate for students in all majors. Students will not receive credit if taken after BIEB 182.

BILD 51. Quantitative Biology Project Lab (4)
Course covers two important aspects: (1) interdisciplinary and research-based education and (2) teaching fundamental experimental and computational skills in quantitative studies of living systems. Participation by application only. Material lab fees will apply. Prerequisites: department approval required.

BILD 60. Exploring Issues of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion in Relation to Human Biology (4)
This course will examine diversity, equity, and inclusion beginning with a biological framework. Focus will be on how underlying biological differences have been used to support bias and prejudice against particular groups such as women, African Americans, and Latinos. This course is approved to meet the campus Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) requirement. Prerequisites: BILD 1 and BILD 2 or 3.

BILD 61. Biology, Race, and Society (4)
This course examines historical and current ideas about the structure of human biological variation, traces their impact on society—particularly on the development of the concept of race, and explores the complicated relationship between genes, environments, and human traits.

BILD 62. Introduction to Python for Biologists (4)
Introductory class for biology students interested in using Python for data analysis and visualization. Course covers the basics of programming in Python and introduces students to various implementations of Python analyses for biological data such as time series and images. Students will use their own laptops. Students may receive credit for one of the following: BILD 62, COGS 18, CSE 6R, or CSE 8A.

BILD 70. Genomics Research Initiative Lab I (4)
Students will isolate bacterial viruses or other organisms from the environment and characterize them by methods including electron microscopy and nucleic acid analysis. The genomic DNA will be purified and sent for sequencing. Restricted to student participants in the Phage Genomics Research program. Renumbered from BIMM 171A. Students may not receive credit for BILD 70 and BIMM 171A. Material lab fees will apply. Prerequisites: department approval required.

BILD 75. Essential Lab Techniques in the Biological Sciences (1)
In this hands-on workshop, students will gain experience in the fundamental lab techniques used by biological scientists. The techniques covered will vary by topic. Examples of topics are biochemistry, neuroscience, molecular biology, and microbiology. Intended for students with limited lab experience. Students may enroll up to four times as topics vary.

BILD 80. Job and Internship Preparation: Job Application (1)
This is an internship and job preparation course where professional development skills will be built upon in future quarters. The focus of this course will be writing résumés and cover letters and applying to jobs. Students can apply to internships or jobs that they seek out on their own or through industry partnerships that the course facilitator has strategically developed for this course. Open to biology majors only. It is recommended that students take BILD 80, BILD 81, and BILD 82.

BILD 81. Job and Internship Preparation: Interview Skills (1)
This is an internship and job preparation course where professional development skills will build upon what was learned in the prior quarter. The focus of this course will be interview skills and having mock interviews with industry professionals. Students can apply to internships or jobs that they seek out on their own or through industry partnerships that the course facilitator has strategically developed for this course. Open to biology majors only. It is recommended that students take BILD 80, BILD 81, and BILD 82.

BILD 82. Job and Internship Preparation: Professional Development Skills (1)
This is an internship and job preparation course where professional development skills will build upon what was learned in the prior quarter. The focus of this course will be building soft skills and other professional development skills that are applicable to internships. Students can apply to internships or jobs that they seek out on their own or through industry partnerships that the course facilitator has strategically developed for this course.

BILD 83. Business Communications for Biological Sciences (1)
Students will learn to write and speak clearly and effectively for professional channels including email, presentations, and business meetings. Students will practice these techniques with industry professionals who will provide feedback to help them strengthen these skills.

BILD 84R. Career Exploration in Biological Sciences (2)
The goal of this course is to expose students to careers available with a biology degree. The course will focus on diverse career topics such as research, sustainability, medicine and healthcare, product management, business development, science communication, sales, entrepreneurship, and legal professions. Students will engage with industry professionals in these areas through panel discussions and will read and discuss articles on these career pathways. Note: This course is a distance education course.

BILD 87. First-year Seminar (1)
The First-year Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year seminars can be offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students.

BILD 91. Biology First-year Students: Strategies for Success (1)
Course is designed to assist new first-year students in making a smooth and informed transition from high school. Lectures focus on study skills, academic planning and using school and campus resources to help achieve academic, personal and professional goals. Exercises and practicums will develop the problems solving skills needed to succeed in biology. Attention will be given to research possibilities. Intended for new first-year students.

BILD 92. Professional Development Topics in the Biological Sciences (1)
Seminars will introduce students to various professional development topics in the biological sciences. Emphasis may include current research in academe and industry, using campus and community resources to help achieve academic, personal and professional goals, and career exploration. Activities may include presentations by faculty, alumni, and practicing professional biologists, as well as panel discussions with professionals from industry.

BILD 95. Undergraduate Workshops (1)
The workshops will be restricted to lower-division undergraduates. The course will introduce students to the methods of scientific research and to a variety of research topics in the biological/biomedical sciences. Examples of topics are: Introduction to Scientific Research, AIDS, Medical and Social Aspects, Is the Mind the Same as the Brain, Wildlife Conservation.

BILD 96. Biology: Honors Seminar (2)
Weekly seminar providing Biological Sciences Scholars Program students with the opportunity to learn more about research and scholarly activities available to them and acquaints them with UC San Diego faculty members. The course will promote student’s participation in research and other scholarly activities on campus. Prerequisites: department approval required.

BILD 97. Topics in Modern Biology: Professional Development and Analysis (1)
Students participating in the Biological Sciences Co-Op Program will meet with course instructors and fellow students during the quarter to discuss their project. At the end of the course, students will give a formal presentation describing their co-op project and complete a written assignment designed to evaluate their co-op experience. This course will focus on professional development skills designed to prepare students to provide feedback on research and communication in an industry setting. May be taken for credit up to six times. Prerequisites: department approval required.

BILD 98. Directed Group Study (1 to 4)
Investigation of a topic in biological sciences through directed reading and discussion by a small group of students under the supervision of a faculty member. Students must complete a Special Studies form. Paperwork for a BILD 98 must be submitted to SIS by Friday of the eighth week of the quarter preceding the quarter in which the 98 will be completed. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: department approval required.

BILD 99. Independent Research in Biological Sciences (2 or 4)
Independent research by special arrangement with a faculty member. (P/NP grades only.) Students must have an overall UC San Diego GPA of at least 3.0 and a minimum of thirty units complete. Students must complete a Special Studies form and a School of Biological Sciences Research Plan. Credit may not be received for a course numbered 99 subsequent to receiving credit for a course numbered 199. Prerequisites: department approval required.

BIBC 100. Structural Biochemistry (4)
The structure and function of biomolecules. Includes protein conformation, dynamics, and function; enzymatic catalysis, enzyme kinetics, and allosteric regulation; lipids and membranes; sugars and polysaccharides; and nucleic acids. Prerequisites: BENG 120 or CHEM 140A or CHEM 40A or CHEM 41A and BENG 120 or CHEM 140B or CHEM 40B or CHEM 41B. Note: Students may not receive credit for both BIBC 100 and CHEM 114A.

BIBC 102. Metabolic Biochemistry (4)
Energy-producing pathways–glycolysis, the TCA cycle, oxidative phosphorylation, photosynthesis, and fatty acid oxidation; and biosynthetic pathways–gluconeogenesis, glycogen synthesis, and fatty acid biosynthesis. Nitrogen metabolism, urea cycle, amino acid metabolism, nucleotide metabolism, and metabolism of macromolecules. Prerequisites: BENG 120 or CHEM 140A or CHEM 40A or CHEM 41A and BENG 120 or CHEM 140B or CHEM 40B or CHEM 41B. Note: Students may not receive credit for both BIBC 102 and CHEM 114B.

BIBC 103. Biochemical Techniques (4)
Introductory laboratory course in current principles and techniques applicable to research problems in biochemistry and molecular biology. Techniques include protein and nucleic acid purification; identification methods such as centrifugation, chromatography, and electrophoresis; immunological, spectrophotometric, and enzymatic methods. Material lab fees will apply. Prerequisites: BILD 1. Note: Students may not receive credit for BIBC 103 after taking CHEM 108. Attendance at the first lecture/lab is required. Nonattendance may result in the student’s being dropped from the course roster.

BIBC 120. Nutrition (4)
Elaborates the relationship between diet and human metabolism, physiology, health, and disease. Covers the functions of carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, vitamins, and minerals, and discusses dietary influences on cardiovascular disease, diabetes, obesity, and cancer. Prerequisites: BIBC 102 or CHEM 114B.

BIBC 140. Our Energy Future—Sustainable Energy Solutions (4)
Course will provide an overview of energy production and utilization and the consequences of this on the economy and environment. The course will introduce renewable energy technologies including biofuels, and explores the social, economic, and political aspects of energy use. Prerequisites: BILD 1.

BIBC 151. Chemistry of Biological Interactions (4)
Nearly all interactions between organisms, including host-pathogen interactions and mate attraction, have a chemical basis. Plants and microorganisms are the dominant life forms on earth and remain a major source of pharmaceutical leads. Students in this course will utilize biochemical methods to extract, fractionate, and analyze plant and microbial compounds of medicinal and ecological significance including antibiotics, growth regulators, toxins, and signaling molecules. Students use own laptops. Course requires field studies. Transportation not provided by the university. Students must comply with all risk management policies and procedures. Course materials fees will be applied. Prerequisites: BIBC 100 or BIBC 102 or CHEM 114A or CHEM 114B.

BIBC 194. Advanced Topics in Modern Biology: Biochemistry (2)
Course will vary in title and content. Students are expected to actively participate in course discussions, read, and analyze primary literature. Current descriptions and subtitles may be found on the Schedule of Classes and the School of Biological Sciences website. Students may receive credit in 194 courses a total of four times as topics vary. Students may not receive credit for the same topic. Prerequisites: BIBC 100 or BIBC 102 or CHEM 114A or CHEM 114B.

BICD 100. Genetics (4)
An introduction to the principles of heredity emphasizing diploid organisms. Topics include Mendelian inheritance and deviations from classical Mendelian ratios, pedigree analysis, gene interactions, gene mutation, linkage and gene mapping, reverse genetics, population genetics, and quantitative genetics. Students may receive credit for one of the following: BICD 100 or BICD 100R. Prerequisites: BILD 1 and BILD 3.

BICD 100R. Genetics (4)
An introduction to the principles of heredity emphasizing diploid organisms. Topics include Mendelian inheritance and deviations from classical Mendelian ratios, pedigree analysis, gene interactions, gene mutation, linkage and gene mapping, reverse genetics, population genetics, and quantitative genetics. This course is a distance education course. Students may receive credit for one of the following: BICD 100 or BICD 100R. Prerequisites: BILD 1 and BILD 3.

BICD 101. Eukaryotic Genetics Laboratory (4)
Course implements key concepts in genetics and genomics such as performing and interpreting results of genetic crosses, analyzing mutations and their phenotypic consequences, analyzing the genetic basis of quantitative traits, and analyzing genome sequences in relation to phenotypic variation. Attendance at the first lecture/lab is required. Nonattendance may result in the student being dropped from the course roster. Recommended preparation: BICD 100. Prerequisites: BILD 1.

BICD 102. Genetic Inquiry (4)
Students will interact with primary literature in genetics through reading, writing, and in-class discussions. The focus will be to learn to analyze research data and develop critical thinking skills, while applying concepts in genetics to understand scientific discoveries. Topics may vary from quarter to quarter; examples include but are not limited to genetic basis of complex human traits or genetics and evolution of form and function in organisms. Prerequisites: BICD 100 or BICD 100R and MATH 11.

BICD 104. Genetic Neurobiology (4)
This course will survey studies of the genetic influences on behavior and the use of genetic tools to study behavior and neurobiology, with particular emphasis on studies of the mechanisms underlying various behaviors. Studies of model organisms (bacteria, paramecium, C. elegans, Drosophila, and mice) will be discussed along with their implications for understanding human behavior. The material is highly interdisciplinary, reflecting the variety of experimental approaches to the subject. Prerequisites: BILD 2 and BICD 100 or BICD 100R.

BICD 110. Cell Biology (4)
The structure and function of cells and cell organelles, cell growth and division, motility, cell differentiation and specialization. Prerequisites: BIBC 100 or BIBC 102 or CHEM 114A or CHEM 114B.

BICD 112. Stem Cells and Regeneration (4)
Stem cells maintain homeostasis of nearly all organ systems and the regenerative capacity of certain organisms. Course explores the paradigm of the tissue-specific stem cell, the cellular mechanisms of tissue regeneration, the evolution of stem cells and regenerative capacity over time, the basis of induced pluripotency, and how these basic processes can inform new approaches to human health. Prerequisites: BIMM 100.

BICD 120. Molecular Basis of Plant Development (4)
Introduction to the biology of plants with a particular focus on the underlying genetic and molecular mechanisms controlling plant development. Topics include the role of plant hormones and stem cells in the formation of embryos, roots, flowers, and fruit. Prerequisites: BILD 1.

BICD 123. Plant Molecular Genetics and Biotechnology Laboratory (4)
Techniques in plant cell and tissue culture, plant transformation, genetic selection and screening of mutants, host pathogen interactions, gene regulation, organelle isolation, membrane transport. Attendance at the first lecture/lab is required. Nonattendance may result in the student being dropped from the course roster. Recommended preparation: BICD 120. Material lab fees will apply. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; BICD 100 or BICD 100R.

BICD 124. Plant Innate Immunity (4)
Plant immunity protects against pathogens and enables symbioses. This course explores the agents of plant disease, the genetics of inherited immunity, mechanisms of pathogenesis and defense, the coordination of plant immunity by plant hormones, and the regulation of symbioses. Prerequisites: BICD 100 or BICD 100R.

BICD 130. Embryos, Genes, and Development (4)
Developmental biology of animals at the tissue, cellular, and molecular levels. Basic processes of embryogenesis in a variety of invertebrate and vertebrate organisms. Cellular and molecular mechanisms that underlie cell fate determination and cell differentiation. More advanced topics such as pattern formation and sex determination are discussed. Open to upper-division students only. Recommended preparation: BICD 110 and BIMM 100. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; BICD 100 or BICD 100R and BIBC 100 or BIBC 102 or CHEM 114A or CHEM 114B.

BICD 136. AIDS Science and Society (4)
An introduction to all aspects of the AIDS epidemic. Topics will include the epidemiology, biology, and clinical aspects of HIV infection, HIV testing, education and approaches to therapy, and the social, political, and legal impacts of AIDS on the individual and society. In order to count for their major, biology majors must take the upper-division course, BICD 136. Prerequisites: BILD 1, BILD 2 recommended.

BICD 140. Immunology (4)
Formation and function of the mammalian immune system, molecular and cellular basis of the immune response, infectious diseases and autoimmunity. Prerequisites: BICD 100 or BICD 100R, BIMM 100. BIBC 100 recommended.

BICD 145. Laboratory in Molecular Medicine (4)
This course focuses upon a molecular and immunological approach to study problems in modern medical research. The emphasis will be on novel approaches in medicine, including lymphocyte biology, cancer biology, and gene transfer. Material lab fees will apply. Prerequisites: BIMM 100.

BICD 156. Population Genetics (4)
How do natural selection, mutation, migration, and genetic drift drive evolution? Students will learn how these forces operate and how to describe them quantitatively with simple mathematical models. We will discuss how to apply this knowledge to understand the spread of drug resistance in pathogens, the evolution of beneficial as well as disease traits in our own species, the evolution of engineered organisms, and more. Renumbered from BIEB 156. Students may not receive credit for BICD 156 and BIEB 156. Prerequisites: BICD 100 or BICD 100R and MATH 10A or MATH 20A.

BICD 158. Active Genetics (4)
An advanced introduction to non-Mendelian genetics with an emphasis on CRISPR-based mechanisms for achieving super-Mendelian inheritance of genetic traits. The course will provide a brief history of non-Mendelian genetics and then move on to the use of such systems for laboratory research or to alter populations of organisms either locally or more broadly to address issues of public health such as insecticide resistance and antibiotic resistance to support globally sustainable practices. Prerequisites: BICD 100 or BICD 100R.

BICD 194. Advanced Topics in Modern Biology: Cellular Development (2)
Course will vary in title and content. Students are expected to actively participate in course discussions, read, and analyze primary literature. Current descriptions and subtitles may be found on the Schedule of Classes and the School of Biological Sciences website. Students may receive credit in 194 courses a total of four times as topics vary. Students may not receive credit for the same topic. Prerequisites: BICD 110.

BIEB 100. Biostatistics (4)
An interactive introduction to estimation, hypothesis testing, and statistical reasoning. Emphasis on the conceptual and logical basis of statistical ideas. Focus on randomization rather than parametric techniques. Topics include describing data, sampling, bootstrapping, and significance. Mandatory one-hour weekly section. Students may not receive credit for both BIEB 100 and SIO 187. Prerequisites: BILD 3 and MATH 10A or 20A and MATH 10B or 20B. Students may not receive credit for both BIEB 100 and SIO 187.

BIEB 102. Introductory Ecology—Organisms and Habitat (4)
This course emphasizes principles shaping organisms, habitats, and ecosystems. Topics covered include population regulation, physiological ecology, competition, predation, and human exploitation. This will be an empirical look at general principles in ecology and conservation with emphasis on the unique organisms and habitats of California. Prerequisites: BILD 3 or equivalent.

BIEB 121. Ecology Laboratory (4)
A laboratory course to familiarize students with ecological problem solving and methods. Students will perform outdoor fieldwork and use a computer for data exploration and analysis. Fieldwork can be expected in this course. Associated travel may be required, and students are responsible for their own transportation. Students may need to provide and use their own laptop. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: BIEB 100 or MATH 11 or SIO 187 and BILD 3.

BIEB 123. Molecular Methods in Evolution and Ecology Lab (4)
Theory and practice of molecular biology techniques used in evolutionary and ecological research. Includes isolation and genotyping of DNA, PCR, and its applications. Phylogenetics, biodiversity, bioinformatics, and evolutionary and ecological analysis of molecular data. Material lab fees will apply. Attendance at the first lecture/lab is required. Nonattendance may result in the student being dropped from the course roster. Prerequisites: BILD 1 and BILD 3.

BIEB 126. Plant Ecology (4)
This course begins with an introduction to plant population biology including whole-plant growth and physiology. We then focus on three classes of ecological interactions: plant-plant competition, plant-herbivore coevolution, and plant reproductive ecology including animal pollination and seed dispersal. Prerequisites: BILD 3.

BIEB 128. Insect Diversity (4)
Course begins with a survey of insect diversity and phylogenetic relationships. Course then addresses issues such as population dynamics (including outbreaks), movement and migration, competition, predation, herbivory, parasitism, insect defense, mimicry complexes, and sociality. Course also includes discussions of pest management, evolution of insecticide resistance, insect-borne diseases, and how insects are responding to global change. Prerequisites: BILD 3.

BIEB 130. Marine Conservation Biology (4)
Course integrates principles of ecology and marine biology to examine marine biodiversity loss from overexploitation, habitat loss, invasion, climate change, and pollution. We examine consequences of biodiversity loss to marine ecosystems, discuss management regimes, and address global and local ocean conservation problems. Course includes basic overviews of climate, marine biology, and oceanography that may be similar to topics covered in introductory courses at Scripps Institution of Oceanography. Prerequisites: BILD 3.

BIEB 131. Marine Invertebrate Ecology Lab (4)
A laboratory course introducing students to coastal marine ecology. Students will participate in outdoor fieldwork and work in the laboratory gathering and analyzing ecological data. We will focus on ecological communities from a variety of coastal habitats and use them to learn about basic ecological processes as well as issues related to sustainability and conservation of biodiversity. Fieldwork is expected in this course. Associated travel in the San Diego area is required and students are responsible for their own transportation. Material lab fees will apply. Prerequisites: BILD 3 and BIEB 100 or MATH 11.

BIEB 134. Introduction to Biological Oceanography (4)
(Cross-listed with SIO 134.) Basics for understanding the ecology of marine communities. The approach is process-oriented, focusing on major functional groups of organisms, their food-web interactions and community response to environmental forcing, and contemporary issues in human and climate influences. Prerequisites: BILD 3. Students will not receive credit for both BIEB 134 and SIO 134.

BIEB 135. Aquatic Ecology Lab (4)
Course provides overview of physical, chemical, and biological processes that characterize inland waters (lakes and rivers), estuaries, and near-shore environments. Dominant biota of lakes, rivers, and streams, and how they are related to physical and chemical processes of the systems in which they reside will be covered. Methods will be introduced for assessing the chemical composition of water and detecting organisms that affect drinking water quality and coastal water quality management. Course requires field studies. Students should expect to fully participate in field trips; transportation not provided by the university. Students must comply with all risk management policies/procedures. Material lab fees will apply. Prerequisites: BILD 3.

BIEB 136GS. Tropical Field Ecology (4)
An introduction to the ecosystems of Costa Rica and the methods used to study them. Students will work in teams to collect data and make systematic natural history observations on plants, insects, birds, and other organisms in tropical rain forests, mangroves, and other tropical environments. Hypothesis formulation and testing, data analysis, and oral and written presentation of research will be emphasized. Students must apply and be accepted to the Global Seminar Program in order to enroll. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: BILD 3.

BIEB 137GS. Sea Turtle Ecology and Conservation (4)
Course will introduce the biology of sea turtles (evolution, physiology, anatomy, behavior, life history, and population dynamics), conservation status, and ecological roles in coastal and marine ecosystems. Course reviews socioecological systems to incorporate human connections to sea turtles, the ocean, and governance. Emerging research and technology will be integrated with national and international law and policy to learn about management of endangered and migratory species. Students must apply and be accepted to the Global Seminar Program in order to enroll. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: BILD 3.

BIEB 140. Biodiversity (4)
An introduction to the patterns of geographic distribution and natural history of plants and animals living in terrestrial and marine ecosystems. We will explore ecological and evolutionary processes responsible for generating and maintaining biological diversity; and the nature of extinction both in past and present ecosystem. Prerequisites: BILD 3.

BIEB 141. Introduction to Quantitative Modeling for Biologists’ Lab (4)
This lab course will be a hands-on introduction to quantitative modeling as a tool for understanding biological systems. Working closely with the instructor, students will learn new biology by practicing how to construct, analyze, and interpret simple mathematical models. The emphasis is not on the math itself but on the practical use of quantitative reasoning for gaining new biological insights. Students will need to provide and use their own laptop/technology. Prerequisites: BILD 1.

BIEB 143. Computer Modeling in Evolution and Ecology (4)
An introduction to computer modeling in evolution and ecology. Students will use the computer language “R” to write code to analyze ecological and evolutionary processes. Topics include natural selection, genetic drift, community ecology, game theory, and chaos. Students will use their own laptop computers. Prerequisites: BIEB 100 or BIEB 150.

BIEB 146. Genome Diversity and Dynamics (4)
Modern sequencing technology has revolutionized our ability to detect how genomes vary in space among individuals, populations, and communities, and over time. This course will review methods and concepts in ecological and evolutionary genomics that help us understand these differences, including their relevance to health (human microbiome, cancer evolution), evolutionary history (ancestor reconstruction, human evolution), and the environment (effect of climate change). Prerequisites: BILD 1 and BILD 3.

BIEB 150. Evolution (4)
Evolutionary processes are discussed in their genetic, historical, and ecological contexts. Population genetics, agents of evolution, microevolution, speciation, macroevolution. Prerequisites: BILD 3 and BILD 1 or BIEB 143.

BIEB 152. Evolution of Infectious Diseases (4)
Treating infectious diseases is a uniquely difficult problem since pathogens often evolve, rendering today’s therapies useless tomorrow. This course will provide a review of concepts and methods in evolutionary medicine, with an emphasis on microbial genomics and molecular evolution. Prerequisites: BILD 3.

BIEB 154. Evolutionary Inquiry (4)
Students will investigate selected in-depth topics in evolutionary biology through reading and writing. Students will read books and articles written for a general audience as well as primary literature. Example topics include the origins of novel features, the impact of human activity and environmental changes on evolutionary processes, the rate and intensity of natural selection, and how our own evolutionary history affects human health. Prerequisites: BILD 1 and BILD 3.

BIEB 156. Evolution and Society (4)
Students will investigate concepts and techniques from the field of evolutionary biology that can be used to tackle societal issues and challenges. Popular science articles and primary research will be used to highlight the use of evolutionary methods or concepts. The course will begin with a brief overview of core eco-evolutionary concepts, then move into exploration of the contributions of evolutionary biology to the fields of conservation, bioengineering, agriculture, and medicine. Prerequisites: BILD 1 and BILD 3.

BIEB 158. Microbiomes: The Ecology and Evolution of Microbes (4)
Microbes, the most numerous organisms on the planet, are often the most maligned. Most do not cause disease, but instead are useful: producing oxygen, promoting plant growth, or helping us digest. This course explores the microbial communities that regulate Earth’s biological and chemical processes. Students will learn theory, methods, and applications of microbial ecology and evolution relevant to contemporary world issues including human health, conservation of biodiversity, and climate change. Prerequisites: BILD 1 and BILD 3.

BIEB 166. Animal Behavior and Communication (4)
An integrated approach to animal behavior focusing on mechanisms of acoustic, visual, and olfactory communication. Course covers ethology and the genetics and neurobiology of behavior; orientation and navigation; and signal origins, properties, design, and evolution. Prerequisites: BILD 3 and Physics 1A or 2A.

BIEB 174. Ecosystems and Global Change (4)
This course will teach the principles of ecosystem ecology in terrestrial and marine systems and will use examples from recent research to help students understand how global environmental changes are altering processes from leaf-level ecophysiology to global cycling of carbon, water, and nutrients. Fieldwork may be required. Prerequisites: BILD 3.

BIEB 176. Biology of Conservation and the Human Predicament (4)
Discussion of the human predicament, biodiversity crisis, and importance of biological conservation. Examines issues from biological perspectives emphasizing new approaches and new techniques for safeguarding the future of humans and other biosphere inhabitants. Prerequisites: BILD 3.

BIEB 182. Biology of Global Change (4)
This class will focus on ecological and evolutionary responses to three major anthropogenic stressors—climate change, resource exploitation, and urbanization. Students will learn about the eco-evolutionary changes that are currently happening due to anthropogenic impacts and also predictions about future changes due to such impacts. They will also learn about the economic and societal impacts of such changes and some of the strategies for conservation and sustainability in a changing world. Prerequisites: BIEB 102.

BIEB 194. Advanced Topics in Modern Biology: Ecology, Behavior, Evolution (2)
Course will vary in title and content. Students are expected to actively participate in course discussions, read, and analyze primary literature. Current descriptions and subtitles may be found on the Schedule of Classes and the School of Biological Sciences website. Students may receive credit in 194 courses a total of four times as topics vary. Students may not receive credit for the same topic. Prerequisites: BIEB 102.

BIMM 100. Molecular Biology (4)
Molecular mechanisms and applications of the central dogma. Genome structure and function. Transcription and translation. Regulation of gene expression. Use of DNA technology in basic and applied biology. Note: Students will not receive credit for both BIMM 100 and CHEM 114C. Prerequisites: BILD 1 and BIBC 103 or BILD 4 or BILD 70 or BIMM 101 and BENG 120 or CHEM 40A or CHEM 40AH or CHEM 41A and BENG 120 or CHEM 40B or CHEM 40BH or CHEM 41B.

BIMM 101. Recombinant DNA Techniques (4)
Theory and practice of recombinant DNA and molecular biology techniques. Includes CRISPR-Cas9 editing, DNA sequencing, PCR, and basic bioinformatics. Nonattendance may result in the student’s being dropped from the course roster. Note: Students may not enroll in or receive credit for both BIMM 101 and CHEM 109. Material lab fees will apply. Prerequisites: BILD 1.

BIMM 110. Molecular Basis of Human Disease (4)
An examination of the molecular basis of human diseases. Course emphasizes inherited human disorders, and some important diseases caused by viruses. Focus on the application of genetic, biochemical, and molecular biological principles to an understanding of the diseases. Prerequisites: BICD 100 or BICD 100R and BIMM 100 and BIBC 100 or BIBC 102 or CHEM 114A or CHEM 114B, upper-division standing.

BIMM 112. Regulation of Eukaryotic Gene Expressions (4)
This course explores the mechanisms by which gene activity is regulated in eukaryotes, with an emphasis on transcriptional regulation and chromatin. Topics will include chromatin structure, histone modifications, chromatin dynamics, transcription factors, transcriptional elongation, enhancers, CpG methylation, heterochromatin, and epigenetics. Prerequisites: BIMM 100.

BIMM 114. Virology (4)
An introduction to eukaryotic virology, with emphasis on animal virus systems. Topics discussed include the molecular structure of viruses; the multiplication strategies of the major virus families; and viral latency, persistence, and oncology. Prerequisites: BIMM 100.

BIMM 116. Circadian Rhythms—Biological Clocks (4)
(Cross-listed with Psych 133; however, biology majors must take the course as BIMM 116.) This interdisciplinary course provides an overview of the fundamental properties of daily biological clocks of diverse species, from humans to microbes. Emphasis is placed on the relevance of internal time keeping in wide-ranging contexts including human performance, health, and industry. Prerequisites: BILD 1 or COGS 107B or PSYC 106. Students may receive credit for one of the following: BIMM 116, BIMM 116R, PSYC 133, or PSYC 133R.

BIMM 116B. BioClock Studio (4)
The BioClock Studio is an innovative course in which a team of undergraduate students, drawn from diverse disciplines, will work collaboratively to develop their scientific and communicative skills to produce creative educational materials that will enhance understanding of circadian biology. Students are expected to attend the annual Circadian Biology Symposium held each winter, to the extent course schedules allow, to conduct interviews with prominent scientists. BIMM 116 is not a prerequisite to enroll in BIMM 116B. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: department approval required. Students will be required to formally apply to participate via an online application form and selected students will work in small teams with intensive mentoring to execute projects.

BIMM 116R. Circadian Rhythms—Biological Clocks (4)
(Cross-listed with PSYC 133R; however, biology majors must take the course as BIMM 116R.) This interdisciplinary course provides an overview of the fundamental properties of daily biological clocks of diverse species, from humans to microbes. Emphasis is placed on the relevance of internal timekeeping in wide-ranging contexts including human performance, health, and industry. Prerequisites: BILD 1 or COGS 107B or PSYC 106. This course is a distance education course. Students may receive credit for one of the following: BIMM 116, BIMM 116R, PSYC 133, or PSYC 133R.

BIMM 118. Pharmacology (4)
Basics of pharmacology such as drug absorption, distribution, metabolism, and elimination. Concepts in toxicology and pharmacognosy are used to survey the major drug categories. Prerequisites: BIPN 100 and BIBC 100 or BIBC 102 or CHEM 114A or CHEM 114B.

BIMM 120. Microbiology (4)
A discussion of the structure, growth, physiology, molecular genetics, genomics, and ecology of prokaryotic microorganisms, with emphasis on the genetic and metabolic diversity of bacteria and Archaea and their interactions with hosts and the environment. Prerequisites: BILD 3 and BIBC 100 or BIBC 102 or CHEM 114A or CHEM 114B and BIMM 100.

BIMM 121. Microbiology Laboratory (4)
Techniques in microbial physiology, microbial genomics, microbial evolution, and microbial ecology will be used to explore the role of microbes in industry, health, and the environment. Inquiry-based experiments will cover the fundamentals of both working with live microscopic organisms at the bench and bioinformatically analyzing their genomes at the computer. Attendance at the first lecture/lab is required. Nonattendance may result in the student being dropped from the course roster. Material lab fees will apply. Prerequisites: BILD 1.

BIMM 122. Microbial Genetics (4)
Course will consider the organization and function of prokaryotic genomes including content, DNA supercoiling, histone-like proteins, chromosomal dynamics (short-term and long-term), extrachromosomal elements, bacterial sex, transduction, transformation, mobile elements (transposon), epigenetic change, adaptive and directed mutation, transcription and its regulation, sensory transduction, bacterial differentiation, symbiosis, and pathogenesis. Prerequisites: BIMM 100.

BIMM 124. Medical Microbiology (4)
Encompasses the increasingly important areas of viral, bacterial, and parasitic diseases and understanding the complex interaction between humans and infectious agents. Covers human-pathogen interactions, mechanisms and molecular principles of infectious diseases, immune responses, countermeasures by pathogens and hosts, epidemiology, and cutting-edge approaches to therapy. Prerequisites: BIBC 100 or BIBC 102 or CHEM 114A or CHEM 114B.

BIMM 130. Microbial Physiology (4)
Prokaryotic cell biology will be discussed primarily from physiological and biochemical standpoints with a focus on conceptual understanding, integration, and mechanism. Topics will vary from year to year but will include the following themes: bioenergetics, cell polarity, cell adhesion, the molecular basis of morphogenesis and differentiation, prokaryotic motility and behavior, rotary and linear molecular machines, bacterial organelles, pheromones and messengers, circadian rhythms, biological warfare, and bioremediation. Prerequisites: BIBC 100 or BIBC 102 or CHEM 114A or CHEM 114B.

BIMM 134. Biology of Cancer (4)
This course explores the molecular and cellular pathways that become dysregulated during carcinogenesis. We will synthesize principles from genetics and molecular, cellular, and developmental biology to investigate how normal cells evolve into tumors. We will examine how tissues distinct from the tumor itself can participate in both facilitating and fighting tumor growth and explore historical and current approaches employed to inhibit tumorigenesis. Prerequisites: BILD 1, upper-division standing.

BIMM 140. Quantitative Principles in Biology (4)
Course considers problems in biology that were solved using quantitative biology approaches. Problems will range from the molecular to the population level. Students will learn about the scientific method and process, and how to apply it. Prerequisites: BILD 1.

BIMM 143. Bioinformatics Laboratory (4)
Bioinformatics is the analysis of big data in the biosciences. This course provides a hands-on introduction to the computer-based analysis of biomolecular and genomic data. Major topic areas include advances in sequencing technologies, genome resequencing and variation analysis, transcriptomics, structural bioinformatics, and personal genomics. This course will utilize free, web-based bioinformatics tools and no programming skills are required. Students may receive credit for one of the following: BIMM 143 or BIMM 143R.Prerequisites: BILD 1 and BILD 4 or BIEB 123 or BIMM 101.

BIMM 143R. Bioinformatics Laboratory (4)
Bioinformatics is the analysis of big data in the biosciences. This course provides a hands-on introduction to the computer-based analysis of biomolecular and genomic data. Major topic areas include advances in sequencing technologies, genome resequencing and variation analysis, transcriptomics, structural bioinformatics, and personal genomics. This course will utilize free, web-based bioinformatics tools and no programming skills are required. This course is a distance education course. Students may receive credit for one of the following: BIMM 143 or BIMM 143R. Prerequisites: BILD 1 and BILD 4 or BIEB 123 or BIMM 101.

BIMM 149. Computation for Biologists (4)
Course will provide students with the computational tools and problem-solving skills that are increasingly important to the biosciences. Students learn to program in a modern general-purpose programming language and write their own programs to explore a variety of applications in biology including simulations, sequence analysis, phylogenetics, among others. Students will use their own laptop computers. Prerequisites: BILD 1 and BILD 2.

BIMM 170. Genomics Research Initiative Laboratory II (4)
Students will characterize the genomic sequence of the organisms isolated in BILD 70 and use molecular and computational tools to resolve ambiguities and close gaps. They will then annotate the DNA sequence to identify protein and RNA coding regions. Renumbered from BIMM 171B. Students may not receive credit for BIMM 170 and BIMM 171B. Material lab fees will apply. Prerequisites: BILD 70.

BIMM 172. Genome Science (4)
Genomes are the immortal agents of evolution, passing from one individual to another in an unbroken line since the origin of life. This course explores the structure of genomes, the functions of its parts on a genome scale, the mechanisms of genome change, and the applications of genomic methods and knowledge. Prerequisites: BICD 100 or BICD 100R and BIMM 100.

BIMM 174. Genomics, Big Data, and Human Health (4)
Imagine a world in which you can input your lifestyle and genomic information into an app to obtain personalized health recommendations. This world is not thirty years in the future but beginning to unfold now. Course reviews how genomic advances are revolutionizing health care. Includes recent developments in personalized medicine, disease screening, targeted immunotherapy, pharmacogenomics, and our emerging understanding of how microbiome and epigenetic factors impact health. Prerequisites: BILD 1 and BILD 4 or BIMM 101.

BIMM 181. Molecular Sequence Analysis (4)
This course covers the analysis of nucleic acid and protein sequences, with an emphasis on the application of algorithms to biological problems. Topics include sequence alignments, database searching, comparative genomics, and phylogenetic and clustering analyses. Pairwise alignment, multiple alignment, DNA sequencing, scoring functions, fast database search, comparative genomics, clustering, phylogenetic trees, gene finding/DNA statistics. This course open to bioinformatics majors only. Prerequisites: CSE 100 or CSE 100R and CSE 101 and BIMM 100 or CHEM 114C. Students may receive credit for one of the following: CSE 181, BIMM 181, or BENG 181.

BIMM 182. Biological Databases (4)
This course provides an introduction to the features of biological data, how that data is organized efficiently in databases, and how existing data resources can be utilized to solve a variety of biological problems. Object-oriented databases, data modeling and description, survey of current biological database with respect to above, implementation of database focused on a biological topic. This course open to bioinformatics majors only. Prerequisites: CSE 100 or CSE 100R. Students may receive credit for one of the following: CSE 182, BENG 182, or BIMM 182.

BIMM 184. Computational Molecular Biology (4)
This advanced course covers the application of machine learning and modeling techniques to biological systems. Topics include gene structure, recognition of DNA and protein sequence patterns, classification, and protein structure prediction. Pattern discovery, hidden Markov models/support vector machines/neural network/profiles, protein structure prediction, functional characterization of proteins, functional genomics/proteomics, metabolic pathways/gene networks. Prerequisites: BIMM 181 or BENG 181 or CSE 181, BIMM 182 or BENG 182 or CSE 182 or CHEM 182.

BIMM 185. Bioinformatics Laboratory (Advanced) (4)
This course emphasizes the hands-on application of bioinformatics methods to biological problems. Students will gain experience in the application of existing software, as well as in combining approaches to answer specific biological questions. Sequence alignment, fast database search, profiles and motifs, comparative genomics, gene finding, phylogenetic trees, protein structure, functional characterization of proteins, expression analysis, computational proteomics. This course open to bioinformatics majors only. Prerequisites: two courses out of BIMM 181 or BENG 181 or CSE 181, BIMM 182 or BENG 182 or CSE 182, BENG 183, BIMM 184 or BENG 184 or CSE 184. Attendance at the first lecture/lab is required. Nonattendance may result in the student’s being dropped from the course roster.

BIMM 194. Advanced Topics in Modern Biology: Molecular Biology (2)
Course will vary in title and content. Students are expected to actively participate in course discussions, read, and analyze primary literature. Current descriptions and subtitles may be found on the Schedule of Classes and the School of Biological Sciences website. Students may receive credit in 194 courses a total of four times as topics vary. Students may not receive credit for the same topic. Prerequisites: BIMM 100.

BIPN 100. Human Physiology I (4)
Course introduces the concepts of physiological regulation, controlled and integrated by the nervous and endocrine systems. Course then examines the muscular, cardiovascular, and renal systems in detail and considers their control through the interaction of nervous activity and hormones. Note: Students may not receive credit for both BIPN 100 and BENG 140A. Prerequisites: BILD 1 and BILD 2.

BIPN 102. Human Physiology II (4)
Course completes a survey of organ systems begun in BIPN 100 by considering the respiratory and gastrointestinal systems. Consideration is given to interactions of these systems in weight and temperature regulation, exercise physiology, stress, and pregnancy and reproduction. Note: Students may not receive credit for both BIPN 102 and BENG 140B. Prerequisites: BIPN 100.

BIPN 105. Human Physiology Lab (6)
The focus of this course is to study human physiology. Experimental animals and human demonstrations are used to study membrane physiology, nerve and muscle function, hormone actions, cardiovascular physiology, and renal function. Students will also perform a research project and present their results in a symposium at the end of the quarter. Material lab fees will apply. Attendance at the first lecture/lab is required. Nonattendance may result in the student being dropped from the course roster. Prerequisites: BIPN 100.

BIPN 106. Comparative Physiology (4)
This course examines the physiological adaptation of animals, invertebrates and vertebrates, to their particular environmental and behavioral niches. Structural, functional, and molecular adaptations of the basic organ systems are discussed. Prerequisites: BILD 2, CHEM 6A-B-C. BILD 3 is recommended.

BIPN 108. Biology and Medicine of Exercise (4)
Course addresses the human body’s response to exercise, addressing energy metabolism and the effects of both acute and chronic exercise on function in several important organ systems. Designing training regimes and the role of exercise in health will be considered. Prerequisites: BIPN 100 and BIBC 102 or CHEM 114B.

BIPN 120. Endocrinology (4)
Normal function and diseases of the major hormone systems of the body including the hypothalamus/pituitary axis, the thyroid gland, reproduction and sexual development, metabolism and the pancreas, bone and calcium metabolism, and the adrenal glands. Students may not receive credit for both BIPN 120 and BICD 150. Prerequisites: BIPN 100.

BIPN 134. Human Reproduction (4)
Course focuses on physiological aspects of the human reproductive systems. Emphasis will be on cellular and systems physiology. Topics will include reproductive endocrinology, gametogenesis, fertilization and implantation, pregnancy and parturition, development of reproductive systems, and reproductive pathologies. Students may not receive credit for both BIPN 134 and BICD 134. Prerequisites: BIPN 100.

BIPN 140. Cellular Neurobiology (4)
This course covers the biophysics of the resting and active membranes of nerve cells. It also covers the mechanisms of sensory transduction and neuromodulation, as well as the molecular basis of nerve cell function. Prerequisites: BILD 1 and BILD 2.

BIPN 142. Systems Neurobiology (4)
Course will cover integrated networks of nerve cells, including simple circuits like those involved in spinal reflexes. Course will study how information and motor output is integrated and processed in the brain. Course will also discuss higher-level neural processing. Prerequisites: BIPN 100 or BIPN 140.

BIPN 144. Developmental Neurobiology (4)
Molecular basis of neuronal cell fate determination, axon pathfinding, synaptogenesis experience-based refinement of connections, and learning in the brain will be examined. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

BIPN 145. Neurobiology Laboratory (4)
Students will gain experience with an array of methods used in modern neurobiology, including electrophysiology, optogenetics, and big data analysis. This laboratory course begins with the electric and chemical underpinnings of the nervous system and then dives into innovative techniques that we can use to study and change it. Attendance at the first lecture/lab is required. Nonattendance may result in the student being dropped from the course roster. Material lab fee will apply. Prerequisites: BILD 4 and BIPN 140 and MATH 11.

BIPN 146. Computational Cellular Neurobiology (4)
Biophysical models of neurons and small neural circuits, including ion channels, synapses, dendrites, and neuromodulators. Analysis of neurons as nonlinear dynamical systems. This course and BIPN 147 are taught in alternate years. Prerequisites: BILD 2 and MATH 10A or MATH 20A and MATH 10B or MATH 20B and MATH 11.

BIPN 147. Computational Systems Neurobiology (4)
Models of neural coding and computation in the olfactory, visual, auditory, and somatosensory systems. Models of the motor system including central pattern generators, reinforcement learning, and motor cortex. Models of memory systems including working memory, long term memory, and memory consolidation. This course and BIPN 146 are taught in alternate years. Prerequisites: BILD 2 and MATH 10A or MATH 20A and MATH 10B or MATH 20B and MATH 11.

BIPN 148. Cellular Basis of Learning and Memory (4)
Course will explore cellular and molecular mechanisms that underlie learning and memory. Topics will include synapse formation and synaptic plasticity, neurotransmitter systems and their receptors, mechanisms of synaptic modification, and effect of experience on neuronal connectivity, and gene expression. Prerequisites: BIPN 140.

BIPN 150. Diseases of the Nervous System (4)
Course will be taught from a research perspective, highlighting the biological pathways impacted by different neurological diseases. Each disease covered will be used to illustrate a key molecular/cellular pathway involved in proper neurological function. Prerequisites: BICD 100 or BICD 100R and BIBC 102 or CHEM 114B.

BIPN 152. The Healthy and Diseased Brain (4)
Covers the clinical symptoms, treatment, and molecular mechanisms of neurological, neurodevelopmental, and neuropsychiatric disorders. Emphasis on understanding methods and developing the ability to read and evaluate the scientific literature. Prerequisites: BIPN 140.

BIPN 154. Neurobiology of Stress and Mental Disorders (4)
This course will focus on the neurobiological mechanisms that mediate stress-induced behavioral change in animal models and in humans. Topics will range from the effects of stress hormones on brain function, to modern techniques for examining and treating stress-induced, long-lasting mental disorders such as depression and anxiety. Prerequisites: BIPN 140.

BIPN 156. Glial Neurobiology (4)
Glia outnumber neurons in the nervous system and are increasingly recognized to play essential roles. This course addresses the different classes of glia, their functions, and their interactions with neurons that make them so important. Prerequisites: BENG 140A or BIPN 100 or BIPN 140.

BIPN 160. Neuroanatomy (4)
The course will cover a broad anatomical and functional description of the human nervous system and explore evidence implicating key brain areas in specific functions. This course will discuss modern techniques and the use of model organisms for dissecting the anatomical organization of the brain. Prerequisites: BILD 1 and BILD 2.

BIPN 162. Neural Data Science (4)
Project-based course in which students will use computational notebooks to perform exploratory data analyses and to test hypotheses in large neuroscience data sets, including the differences between unique neuron types, leveraging text mining of the neuroscience literature, and human neuroimaging analyses. Prerequisites: MATH 11 and BIPN 140 and BILD 62 or COGS 18 or CSE 8A. Students will use their own laptop computers.

BIPN 164. Computational Models and Theories in Neuroscience (4)
This course covers mathematical models of neurons, synapses, and neural networks. We will introduce theoretical frameworks of brain activity and function to understand neural computation and control of behavior. We will discuss network dynamics, synaptic plasticity, learning and memory. Students will apply modeling approaches to address scientific questions and make predictions for experiments. Prerequisites: MATH 10A or MATH 20A and MATH 10B or MATH 20B and MATH 11.

BIPN 189. Brain, Behavior, and Evolution (4)
This course provides a survey of natural behaviors, including birdsong, prey capture, localization, electroreception and echolocation, and the neural systems that control them, emphasizing broad fundamental relationships between brain and behavior across species. Note: Students may not receive credit for PSYC 189 and BIPN 189. Prerequisites: BILD 2 or PSYC 102 or PSYC 106.

BIPN 194. Advanced Topics in Modern Biology: Physiology and Neuroscience (2)
Course will vary in title and content. Students are expected to actively participate in course discussions, read, and analyze primary literature. Current descriptions and subtitles may be found on the Schedule of Classes and the School of Biological Sciences website. Students may receive credit in 194 courses a total of four times as topics vary. Students may not receive credit for the same topic. Prerequisites: BIPN 140.

BISP 170. Bioscholars Seminar: From Bench to Bedside and Beyond (2)
Course will examine different aspects of a current topic in biology and will include several speakers. Each speaker will introduce the scientific foundation of the chosen theme (“bench”), describe practical applications of their subject (“bedside”), and consider social and ethical implications of the topic (“beyond”). The theme of the course will vary from year to year, and speakers will come from a variety of disciplines relevant to the theme. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: BILD 1 and BILD 2.

BISP 182. Cooperative Education and Analysis (2 or 4 or 6)
Students participating in the Biological Sciences Co-Op Program will meet with course instructors and fellow students to discuss their learning outcomes and progress of projects they are assigned at their co-op position with a life sciences company. May be taken for credit up to three times. Students give a presentation outlining their co-op project and complete a written assignment designed to evaluate their co-op experience. Prerequisites: BILD 82.

BISP 191. Biology Transfers: Strategies for Success (1)
Course is designed to assist new transfers in making a smooth and informed transition from community college. Lectures focus on study skills, academic planning and using school and campus resources to help achieve academic, personal and professional goals. Exercises and practicums will develop the problem-solving skills needed to succeed in biology. Attention will be given to research possibilities. Intended for new transfers. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

BISP 192. Senior Seminar in Biology (1)
The Senior Seminar Program is designed to allow senior undergraduates to meet with faculty members in a small group setting to explore an intellectual topic in biology (at the upper-division level). Topics will vary from quarter to quarter. Senior Seminars may be taken for credit up to four times, with a change in topic and permission of the department. Enrollment is limited to twenty students, with preference given to seniors. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; department stamp and/or consent of instructor.

BISP 193. Biology Education Research (2 or 4)
Individual research on a problem in biology education by special arrangement with and under the direction of a faculty member. Projects are expected to involve novel research that examines issues in biology education such as the science of learning, evidence of effective teaching, and equity and inclusion in the classroom. P/PN grades only. May be taken for credit five times. Prerequisites: department approval required. Enrollment is via department approval only. Students must complete a special studies application as well as a research plan. Paperwork for a BISP 193 must be submitted to SIS by all published deadlines as listed on the biology web page.

BISP 194. Advanced Topics in Modern Biology (2)
Course will vary in title and content. Students are expected to actively participate in course discussions, read, and analyze primary literature. Current descriptions and subtitles may be found on the Schedule of Classes and the School of Biological Sciences website. Students may receive credit in 194 courses a total of four times as topics vary. Students may not receive credit for the same topic. Prerequisites: BICD 100 or BICD 100R; upper-division standing.

BISP 195. Undergraduate Instructional Apprenticeship in Biological Sciences (4)
Under the supervision of an instructor, student apprentices will assist in the instruction of a biology course. The purpose of the apprenticeship is to learn the methodology of teaching biology, at the college level, through theory and actual practice in a regularly scheduled course. Limited to upper-division students with a 3.0 GPA or higher. Students must apply the quarter preceding the quarter in which BISP 195 will be completed. Applications are reviewed by instructors, and assignments are made based on school need. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: school approval required. (Note: Students must apply to the school as an undergraduate instructional apprentice and be reviewed by instructors via the online system). This course may be counted toward upper-division electives for a biology major.

BISP 196. Honors Thesis in Biological Sciences (4)
Course for student participants in the senior Honors thesis research program. Students complete individual research on a problem by special arrangement with, and under the direction of, a faculty member. Projects are expected to involve primary, experimental/analytical approaches that augment training in basic biology and that echo the curricular focus of the School of Biological Sciences. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit three times. Research to be approved by Honors thesis faculty adviser via application. Note: Students must apply to the school via the online system. For complete details, applications, and deadlines, please consult the School of Biological Sciences website. Application deadlines are strictly enforced. Prerequisites: students must have senior standing; 3.6 overall and major GPA or above. Research must be approved by Honors thesis faculty adviser. Enrollment in this course is for those students participating in the Honors Program in Biological Sciences and is via department approval only.

BISP 197. Biology Internship Program (2 or 4)
Individual research on a problem by special arrangement with, and under the direction of, a UC San Diego faculty member and a selected researcher in industry or at a research institution. Projects are expected to involve primary, experimental/analytical approaches that augment training in basic biology and that echo the curricular focus of the School of Biological Sciences. Application deadlines are strictly enforced. Consult the School of Biological Sciences website for deadlines. Students must comply with all risk management policies/procedures. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: department approval required. Students must complete at least ninety units of credit and have a minimum GPA of 2.5. A completed and approved application/research plan/learning agreement is required for enrollment.

BISP 198. Directed Group Study in Biological Sciences (1 to 4)
Investigation of a topic in biological sciences through directed reading and discussion by a small group of students under the supervision of a faculty member. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: department approval required. Enrollment is via department approval only. Students must complete a special studies application. Paperwork for a BISP 198 must be submitted to SIS by Friday of the eighth week of the quarter preceding the quarter in which the 198 will be completed.

BISP 199. Individual Research for Undergraduates in Biological Sciences (2 or 4)
Individual research on a problem by special arrangement with, and under the direction of, a faculty member. Projects are expected to involve primary, experimental/analytical approaches that augment training in basic biology and that echo the curricular focus of the School of Biological Sciences. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit five times. Note: Students must apply to the school via the online system. For complete details, applications, and deadlines, please consult the School of Biological Sciences website. Application deadlines are strictly enforced. Prerequisites: department approval required. Students must complete at least ninety units of credit and have a minimum GPA of 2.5.

CHEM 1. The Scope of Chemistry and Biochemistry (1)
This seminar connects first-year students with the chemistry community (peers, staff, faculty, and other researchers) as they explore learning resources, study strategies, professional development, and current areas of active research. With an emphasis on academic and career planning, the series will feature guest lectures by UC San Diego faculty and staff, as well as industrial scientists and representatives from professional organizations such as the American Chemical Society (ACS). P/NP grades only.

CHEM 4. Chemical Thinking (4)
This is a one-quarter preparatory chemistry course intended for students continuing on to general chemistry. The course will focus on the development and analysis of submicroscopic models of matter and structure-property relationships to explain, predict, and control chemical behavior. May not receive credit for both CHEM 4 and CHEM 11. Recommended: concurrent enrollment in MATH 3C, 4C, or 10A or higher. Restricted to first-year and sophomore enrollment.

CHEM 6A. General Chemistry I (4)
First quarter of a three-quarter sequence intended for science and engineering majors. Topics include atomic theory, bonding, molecular geometry, stoichiometry, and types of reactions. May not be taken for credit after CHEM 6AH. Recommended: concurrent or prior enrollment in MATH 4C, 10A, or 20A. Prerequisites: CHEM 4, or AP Chemistry score of 3, or Math Placement Exam qualifying score, or AP Calculus AB score of 2, or MATH 3C.

CHEM 6AH. Honors General Chemistry I (4)
First quarter of a three-quarter honors sequence intended for well-prepared science and engineering majors. Topics include quantum mechanics, molecular orbital theory, and bonding. An understanding of nomenclature, stoichiometry, and other fundamentals is assumed. Students completing 6AH may not subsequently take 6A for credit. May be taken for credit after credit for CHEM 6A. Recommended: completion of a high school physics course strongly recommended. Concurrent enrollment in MATH 20A or higher.

CHEM 6B. General Chemistry II (4)
Second quarter of a three-quarter sequence intended for science and engineering majors. Topics include gases, liquids, and solids, thermochemistry and thermodynamics, physical and chemical equilibria, solubility. May not be taken for credit after CHEM 6BH. Prerequisites: CHEM 6A or 6AH and MATH 10A or 20A. Recommended: concurrent or prior enrollment in MATH 10B or 20B. (F, W, S)

CHEM 6BH. Honors General Chemistry II (4)
Second quarter of a three-quarter honors sequence intended for well-prepared science and engineering majors. Topics include colligative properties, bulk material properties, chemical equilibrium, acids and bases, and thermodynamics. Three hour lecture and one hour recitation. May be taken for credit after credit for CHEM 6B. Students completing 6BH may not subsequently take 6B for credit. Prerequisites: CHEM 6AH and MATH 20A. Recommended: concurrent or prior enrollment in MATH 20B.

CHEM 6C. General Chemistry III (4)
Third quarter of a three-quarter sequence intended for science and engineering majors. Topics include kinetics, acid-base equilibria, electrochemistry, coordination chemistry, and an introduction to nuclear chemistry. May not be taken for credit after CHEM 6CH. Prerequisites: CHEM 6B or 6BH. Recommended: completion of MATH 10B or 20B. (F, W, S)

CHEM 6CH. Honors General Chemistry III (4)
Third quarter of a three-quarter honors sequence intended for well-prepared science and engineering majors. Topics are similar to those in 6C but are taught at a higher level and faster pace. May be taken for credit after credit for CHEM 6C. Students completing 6CH may not subsequently take 6C for credit. Prerequisites: CHEM 6BH and MATH 20B.

CHEM 7L. General Chemistry Laboratory (4)
Condenses a year of introductory training in analytical, inorganic, physical, and synthetic techniques into one intensive quarter. A materials fee is required. A mandatory safety exam must be passed. Students may not receive credit for both CHEM 7L and CHEM 7LM. Prerequisites: CHEM 6B or 6BH.

CHEM 7LM. General Chemistry Laboratory for Majors (4)
Condenses a year of introductory training in analytical, inorganic, physical, and synthetic techniques into one intensive quarter. Students may not receive credit for both CHEM 7L and CHEM 7LM. A materials fee is required. A safety exam must be passed. Enrollment preference given to chemistry and biochemistry majors, followed by other science/engineering majors. Prerequisites: CHEM 6B or 6BH. Restricted to the following major codes: CH25, CH31, CH34, CH35, CH36, CH37, CH38.

CHEM 11. The Periodic Table (4)
Introduction to the material world of atoms and small inorganic molecules. Intended for nonscience majors. Students may not receive credit for both CHEM 4 and CHEM 11.

CHEM 12. Molecules and Reactions (4)
Introduction to molecular bonding and structure and chemical reactions, including organic molecules and synthetic polymers. Intended for nonscience majors. Cannot be taken for credit after any organic chemistry course. Prerequisites: CHEM 11 or good knowledge of high school chemistry.

CHEM 13. Chemistry of Life (4)
Introduction to biochemistry for nonscience majors. Topics include carbohydrates, lipids, amino acids and proteins, with an introduction to metabolic pathways in human physiology.

CHEM 40A. Organic Chemistry for Life Sciences I (4)
The first quarter of a two-quarter organic chemistry sequence intended for biological sciences majors and other interested students. The course provides in-depth study of the molecular structure and reactivity of organic molecules with emphasis on biological applications. Topics covered include bonding theory, resonance, stereochemistry, conjugation, aromaticity, spectroscopy, effects of structure on properties and reactivity, introduction to reaction mechanisms, and nucleophilic substitutions. Students may receive credit for one of the following: CHEM 40A, CHEM 40AH, or CHEM 41A. Recommended: concurrent or prior enrollment in CHEM 6C or 6CH. Prerequisites: CHEM 6B or 6BH.

CHEM 40AH. Honors Organic Chemistry I (4)
Renumbered from CHEM 140AH. Rigorous introduction to organic chemistry, with preview of biochemistry. Bonding theory, isomerism, stereochemistry, physical properties, chemical reactivity. Students may only receive credit for one of the following: CHEM 40A, 40AH, 140A, or 140AH. Prerequisites: B+ or higher grade in CHEM 6C or CHEM 6CH.

CHEM 40B. Organic Chemistry for Life Sciences II (4)
This is the second quarter of a two-quarter organic chemistry sequence intended for biological sciences majors and other interested students. The course is a continuation of CHEM 40A and provides an in-depth study of the molecular structure and reactivity of organic molecules with emphasis on biological applications. Topics covered include carbonyl reactivity, enzymatic catalysis, electrophilic substitutions and additions, and the molecular basis of drug action. Students may receive credit for one of the following: CHEM 40B or 40BH. Prerequisites: CHEM 40A.

CHEM 40BH. Honors Organic Chemistry II (4)
Renumbered from CHEM 140BH. Organic chemistry course for honors-level students with a strong background in chemistry. Similar to CHEM 40B but emphasizes mechanistic aspects of reactions and effects of molecular structure on reactivity. Students may only receive credit for one of the following: CHEM 40B, 140B, 40BH, or 140BH. Prerequisites: grade of B or higher in CHEM 40A, 40AH, 140A, or 140AH.

CHEM 40C. Organic Chemistry III (4)
Renumbered from CHEM 140C. Continuation of CHEM 40A, Organic Chemistry I and CHEM 40B, Organic Chemistry II. Organic chemistry of biologically important molecules: carboxylic acids, carbohydrates, proteins, fatty acids, biopolymers, natural products. Students may only receive credit for one of the following: CHEM 40C, 40CH, 140C, or 140CH. Prerequisites: CHEM 40B or 140B (a grade of C or higher in CHEM 40B or 140B is strongly recommended).

CHEM 40CH. Honors Organic Chemistry (4)
Renumbered from CHEM 140CH. Continuation of Organic Chemistry 40B or 40BH, at honors level. Chemistry of carboxylic acids, carbohydrates, proteins, lipids biopolymers, natural products. Emphasis on mechanistic aspects and structure reactivity relationships. Students may only receive credit for one of the following: CHEM 40C, 40CH, 140C, or 140CH. Prerequisites: grade of B+ or higher in CHEM 40B or 140B, or B– or higher in CHEM 40BH or 140BH.

CHEM 41A. Organic Chemistry I: Structure and Reactivity (4)
This is the first quarter of a three-quarter organic chemistry sequence intended for chemistry, biochemistry, and engineering majors and interested students. The course is a rigorous and in-depth study of fundamental organic chemistry with an introduction to chemical reactivity and synthesis, Bonding theory, structure (including isomerism, stereochemistry, conformations) and physical properties of carbon-containing molecules. Students may receive credit for one of the following: CHEM 41A or 40A. Recommended: concurrent or prior enrollment in CHEM 6C or 6CH. Prerequisites: CHEM 6B or 6BH.

CHEM 41B. Organic Chemistry II: Reactivity and Synthesis (4)
This is the second quarter of a three-quarter organic chemistry sequence for chemistry, biochemistry, and engineering majors and interested students. The course is a rigorous and in-depth study of the properties and reactions of the major classes of organic compounds; focusing on alcohols, ethers, sulfur compounds, aromatics, organometallics, and introduction to carbonyl reactivity. Emphasis on a mechanistic understanding of reactions, the effects of molecular structure, and multi-step syntheses. Prerequisites: CHEM 41A.

CHEM 41C. Organic Chemistry III: Synthesis, Reactivity, and Macromolecules (4)
This is the third quarter of a three-quarter organic chemistry sequence intended for chemistry, biochemistry, and engineering majors and interested students. The course is a continuation of CHEM 41A and CHEM 41B with an in-depth study of the properties, synthesis, and reactions of the major classes of organic compounds. Emphasis on a mechanistic understanding of reactions, the effects of molecular structure, and multi-step syntheses. Prerequisites: CHEM 41B.

CHEM 43A. Organic Chemistry Laboratory (4)
Renumbered from CHEM 143A. Introduction to organic laboratory techniques. Separation, purification, spectroscopy, product analysis, and effects of reaction conditions. A materials fee is required. Students must pass a safety exam. Students may only receive credit for one of the following: CHEM 43A, 43AM, 143A, or 143AM. Prerequisites: CHEM 7L or 7LM and 40A, 40AH, or 41A.

CHEM 43AM. Organic Chemistry Laboratory for Majors (4)
Organic chemistry laboratory for chemistry majors; nonmajors with strong background in CHEM 40A or 140A may also enroll, though preference will be given to majors. Similar to CHEM 43A, but emphasizes instrumental methods of product identification, separation, and analysis. A materials fee is required. Students must pass a safety exam. CHEM 43AM is renumbered from CHEM 143AH. Students may only receive credit for one of the following: CHEM 43AM, 143AM, 43A, or 143A. Prerequisites: CHEM 7L or 7LM and CHEM 40A, 40AH, or 41A.

CHEM 87. First-year Student Seminar in Chemistry and Biochemistry (1)
This seminar will present topics in chemistry at a level appropriate for first-year students.

CHEM 96. Introduction to Teaching Science in Chemistry (2)
(Cross-listed with EDS 31.) Explores routine challenges and exceptional difficulties students often have in learning science. Prepares students to make meaningful observations of how K–12 teachers deal with difficulties. Explores strategies that teachers may use to pose problems that stimulate students’ intellectual curiosity.

CHEM 99. Independent Study in Chemistry (2 or 4)
Independent literature or laboratory research by arrangement with and under the direction of a member of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry faculty. Students must register on a P/NP basis. Prerequisites: lower-division standing, 3.0 minimum UC San Diego GPA, consent of instructor and department, completion of thirty units of undergraduate study at UC San Diego, completed and approved Special Studies form.

CHEM 99H. Independent Study in Chemistry (Honors) (1)
Independent study or research under the direction of a member of the faculty. Prerequisites: student must be of first-year standing and a Regent’s Scholar; approved Special Studies form.

CHEM 100A. Analytical Chemistry Laboratory (4)
Laboratory course emphasizing classical quantitative chemical analysis techniques, including separation and gravimetric methods, as well as an introduction to instrumental analysis. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: CHEM 6C or 6CH and CHEM 7L or 7LM. Recommended: PHYS 2CL or 2BL.

CHEM 100B. Instrumental Chemistry Laboratory (5)
Hands-on laboratory course focuses on development of correct laboratory work habits and methodologies for the operation of modern analytical instrumentation. Gas chromatography, mass spectrometry, high performance liquid chromatography, ion chromatography, atomic absorption spectroscopy, fluorescence spectrometry, infrared spectrometry. Lecture focuses on fundamental theoretical principles, applications, and limitations of instrumentation used for qualitative and quantitative analysis. Program or materials fees may apply. Students may not receive credit for both CHEM 100B and 101. Prerequisites: CHEM 100A and PHYS 2C or 2D and PHYS 2BL or 2CL or 2DL.

CHEM 104. Introduction to X-ray Crystallography (4)
(Conjoined with CHEM 204.) Analysis of macromolecular structures by X-ray diffraction. Topics include symmetry, geometry of diffraction, detection of diffraction, intensity of diffracted waves, phase problem and its solution, heavy atom method, isomorphous replacement, anomalous dispersion phasing methods (MAD), direct methods, and molecular replacement. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A and 2B.

CHEM 105A. Physical Chemistry Laboratory (4)
Laboratory course in experimental physical chemistry. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: CHEM 6CL or 100A, PHYS 2BL or 2CL or 2DL, and CHEM 126 or 126A or 126B or 127 or 130 or 131 or 133.

CHEM 105B. Physical Chemistry Laboratory (4)
Laboratory course in experimental physical chemistry. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: CHEM 105A.

CHEM 108. Protein Biochemistry Laboratory (6)
The application of techniques to study protein structure and function, including electrophoresis, protein purification, column chromatography, enzyme kinetics, and immunochemistry. Students may not receive credit for CHEM 108 and BIBC 103. A materials fee may be required for this course. Prerequisites: CHEM 43A, 143A, 43AM or 143AM, and CHEM 114A.

CHEM 109. Recombinant DNA Laboratory (6)
This laboratory will introduce students to the tools of molecular biology and will involve experiments with recombinant DNA techniques. Students may not receive credit for both CHEM 109 and BIMM 101. A materials fee may be required for this course. Prerequisites: CHEM 43A, 143A, 43AM, or 143AM and CHEM 114A.

CHEM 111. Origins of Life and the Universe (4)
A chemical perspective of the origin and evolution of the biogeochemical systems of stars, elements, and planets through time. The chemical evolution of the earth, its atmosphere, and oceans, and their historical records leading to early life are discussed. The content includes search techniques for chemical traces of life on other planets. Prerequisites: CHEM 6C or 6CH.

CHEM 113. Biophysical Chemistry of Macromolecules (4)
A discussion of the physical principles governing biomolecular structure and function. Experimental and theoretical approaches to understand protein dynamics, enzyme kinetics, and mechanisms will be covered. Prerequisites: CHEM 40C, 40CH, 140C, or 140CH.

CHEM 114A. Biochemical Structure and Function (4)
Introduction to biochemistry from a structural and functional viewpoint. Emphasis will be placed on the structure-functions relationships of nucleic acids, proteins, enzymes, carbohydrates, and lipids. Students may not receive credit for both CHEM 114A and BIBC 100. Prerequisites: CHEM 40A or 41A.

CHEM 114B. Biochemical Energetics and Metabolism (4)
This course is an introduction to the metabolic reactions in the cell which produce and utilize energy. The course material will include energy-producing pathways: glycolysis, Krebs cycle, oxidative phosphorylation, fatty-acid oxidation. Biosynthesis of amino acids, lipids, carbohydrates, purines, pyrimidines, proteins, nucleic acids. Students may not receive credit for both CHEM 114B and BIBC 102. Prerequisites: CHEM 40B, 40BH, or 41B and CHEM 114A.

CHEM 114C. Biosynthesis of Macromolecules (4)
Mechanisms of biosynthesis of macromolecules—particularly proteins and nucleic acids. Emphasis is on how these processes are controlled and integrated with metabolism of the cell. Students may not receive credit for both CHEM 114C and BIMM 100. Prerequisites: CHEM 114A or BIBC 100.

CHEM 114D. Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry (4)
This course represents a continuation of 114C, or an introductory course for first- and second-year graduate students and covers topics in molecular and cellular biochemistry. Emphasis will be placed on contemporary approaches to the isolation and characterization of mammalian genes and proteins, and molecular genetic approaches to understanding eukaryotic development and human disease. May be coscheduled with CHEM 214. Prerequisites: CHEM 114A, 114B, and 114C.

CHEM 115. Genome, Epigenome, and Transcriptome Editing (4)
A discussion of current topics involving nucleic acid modification, including systems derived from zinc fingers, TALEs, and CRISPR-Cas9. Topics of particular emphasis include delivery of genome editing agents, gene drives, and high-throughput genetic screens. May be coscheduled with CHEM 215. Prerequisites: CHEM 114A and 114C. Corequisite: CHEM 109.

CHEM 116. Chemical Biology (4)
A discussion of current topics in chemical biology including mechanistic aspects of enzymes and cofactors, use of modified enzymes to alter biochemical pathways, chemical intervention in cellular processes, and natural product discovery. Prerequisites: CHEM 40C, 40CH, 41C, 140C, or 140CH, and CHEM 114A. (May not be offered every year.)

CHEM 117. Biomedical Research in Health Disparities (4)
A survey of the historical perspective of health disparities including a review of research studies that harmed disadvantaged populations and discussion of race and ethnicity as an independent contributor to health outcomes. This course covers the scientific basis of health disparities including genomics and other biologic factors. The most recent research studies and technologies, including personalized medicine, to reduce health disparities will be addressed. Prerequisites: CHEM 40B, 40CH, or 41C.

CHEM 118. Pharmacology and Toxicology (4)
A survey of the biochemical action of drugs and toxins as well as their absorption and excretion. Prerequisites: CHEM 114A.

CHEM 119. RNA Biochemistry (4)
This course discusses RNA structure and function, as well as biological pathways involving RNA-centered complexes. Emphasis will be placed on catalytic RNA mechanisms, pre-mRNA splicing, noncoding RNA biology, building blocks of RNA structure, and genome editing using RNA-protein complexes. Prerequisites: BIMM 100 or CHEM 114C and CHEM 40C, 40CH, or 41C.

CHEM 120A. Inorganic Chemistry I (4)
The chemistry of the main group elements in terms of atomic structure, ionic and covalent bonding. Structural theory involving s, p, and unfilled d orbitals. Thermodynamic and spectroscopic criteria for structure and stability of compounds and chemical reactions of main group elements in terms of molecular structure and reactivity. Prerequisites: CHEM 6C or 6CH and CHEM 40A, 41A, or 140A.

CHEM 120B. Inorganic Chemistry II (4)
A continuation of the discussion of structure, bonding, and reactivity with emphasis on transition metals and other elements using filled d orbitals to form bonds. Coordination chemistry in terms of valence bond, crystal field, and molecular orbital theory. The properties and reactivities of transition metal complexes including organometallic compounds. Prerequisites: CHEM 120A.

CHEM 123. Advanced Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory (4)
Synthesis, analysis, and physical characterization of inorganic chemical compounds. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: CHEM 120A, 120B and 43A, 143A, 43AM or 143AH. Restricted to the following major codes: CH25, CH31, CH34, CH35, CH36, CH37.

CHEM 125. Bioinorganic Chemistry (4)
The roles of metal ions in biological systems, with emphasis on transition metal ions in enzymes that transfer electrons, bind oxygen, and fix nitrogen. Also included are metal complexes in medicine, toxicity, and metal ion storage and transport. May be coscheduled with CHEM 225. Prerequisites: CHEM 114A and 120A.

CHEM 126A. Physical Biochemistry I: Thermodynamics and Kinetics of Biomolecules (4)
Renumbered from CHEM 127. This course covers thermodynamics and kinetics of biomolecules from fundamental principles to biomolecular applications. Topics include thermodynamics, first and second laws, chemical equilibrium, solutions, kinetic theory, enzyme kinetics. Students may not receive credit for CHEM 126A and either CHEM 127, CHEM 131, or CHEM 132. Prerequisites: CHEM 6C or 6CH, PHYS 1C or 2C or 2D, and MATH 10C or 20C.

CHEM 126B. Physical Biochemistry II: Quantum and Statistical Mechanics of Biomolecules (4)
Renumbered from CHEM 126. This course covers quantum and statistical mechanics of biomolecules. Topics include quantum mechanics, molecular structure, spectroscopy fundamentals and applications to biomolecules, optical spectroscopy, NMR, and statistical approaches to protein folding. Students may not receive credit for CHEM 126B and either CHEM 126 or CHEM 130. Prerequisites: CHEM 126A or 127.

CHEM 130. Chemical Physics: Quantum Mechanics (4)
Renumbered from CHEM 133. With CHEM 131 and 132, CHEM 130 is part of the Physical Chemistry sequence taught over three quarters. Recommended as the first course of the sequence. Key topics covered in this course include quantum mechanics, atomic and molecular spectroscopy, and molecular structure. Students may not receive credit for CHEM 130 and either 126B, 126, or 133. Prerequisites: CHEM 6C or 6CH, and PHYS 2C or 2D, and MATH 20D.

CHEM 131. Chemical Physics: Stat Thermo I (4)
With CHEM 130 and 132, CHEM 131 is part of the Physical Chemistry sequence taught over three quarters. Recommended as the second course of the sequence. Key topics covered in this course include thermodynamics, chemical equilibrium, phase equilibrium, and chemistry of solutions. Students may not receive credit for CHEM 131 and either CHEM 127 or CHEM 126A. Prerequisites: CHEM 6C or 6CH, MATH 20C, and PHYS 2C or 2D.

CHEM 132. Chemical Physics: Stat Thermo II (4)
With CHEM 130 and 131, CHEM 132 is part of the Physical Chemistry sequence taught over three quarters. Recommended as the third course of the sequence. Key topics covered in this course include chemical statistics, kinetic theory, and reaction kinetics. Students may not receive credit for CHEM 132 and either CHEM 126A or CHEM 127. Prerequisites: CHEM 130 or 133, and CHEM 131.

CHEM 134. Polymeric Materials (4)
Foundations of polymeric materials. Topics: structure of polymers; mechanisms of polymer synthesis; characterization methods using calorimetric, mechanical, rheological, and X-ray-based techniques; and electronic, mechanical, and thermodynamic properties. Special classes of polymers: engineering plastics, semiconducting polymers, photoresists, and polymers for medicine. Students may not receive credit for both CENG 134, CHEM 134, or NANO 134. Prerequisites: CHEM 6C and PHYS 2C.

CHEM 135. Molecular Spectroscopy (4)
Time-dependent behavior of systems; interaction of matter with light; selection rules. Radiative and nonradiative processes, coherent phenomena, and the density matrices. Instrumentation, measurement, and interpretation. May be coscheduled with CHEM 235. Prior or concurrent enrollment in CHEM 105A recommended. Prerequisites: CHEM 126 or 126B or 130 or 133 and MATH 20D.

CHEM 141. Organic Nanomaterials (4)
This course will provide an introduction to the physics and chemistry of soft matter, followed by a literature-based critical examination of several ubiquitous classes of organic nanomaterials and their technological applications. Topics include self-assembled monolayers, block copolymers, liquid crystals, photoresists, organic electronic materials, micelles and vesicles, soft lithography, organic colloids, organic nanocomposites, and applications in biomedicine and food science. Prerequisites: CHEM 40A, 40AH, 41A, 140A, or 140AH.

CHEM 142. Introduction to Glycosciences (4)
The primary aim of this course is to provide an overview of fundamental facts, concepts, and methods in glycoscience. The course is structured around major themes in the field, starting from basic understanding of structure and molecular interactions of carbohydrates, to the mechanisms of their biological functions in normal and disease states, to their applications in materials science and energy generation. May be coscheduled with CHEM 242. CHEM 40C and at least one course in either general biology, molecular biology, or cell biology is strongly encouraged. Prerequisites: CHEM 40B, 40BH, 41B, 140B, or 140BH and BIBC 100 or BILD 1 or CHEM 114A.

CHEM 143B. Organic Chemistry Laboratory (4)
Continuation of CHEM 43A or 43AM, emphasizing synthetic methods of organic chemistry. Enrollment is limited to majors in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry unless space is available. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: CHEM 43A or 43AM and CHEM 40B or 41B.

CHEM 143C. Organic Chemistry Laboratory (4)
Identification of unknown organic compounds by a combination of chemical and physical techniques. Enrollment is limited to majors in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry unless space is available. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: CHEM 43A, 43AM, 143A, 143AM, or 143AH and CHEM 40B, 40BH, 41B, 140B, or 140BH.

CHEM 143D. Molecular Design and Synthesis (4)
Advanced organic synthesis. Relationships between molecular structure and reactivity using modern synthetic methods and advanced instrumentation. Stresses importance of molecular design, optimized reaction conditions for development of practically useful synthesis, and problem-solving skills. A materials fee is required. Prerequisites: CHEM 40C, 40CH, 41C, 140C, or 140CH and CHEM 143B.

CHEM 145. Biofuels and Renewable Materials (4)
Fundamentals of the chemistry and biochemistry of biofuel and renewable materials technologies. This course explores chemical identity and properties, metabolic pathways and engineering, refining processes, formulation, and analytical techniques related to current and future renewable products. Prerequisites: CHEM 40B, 40BH, 41B, 140B, or 140BH.

CHEM 146. Kinetics and Mechanism of Organic Reactions (4)
Methodology of mechanistic organic chemistry; integration of rate expression, determination of rate constants, transition state theory; catalysis, kinetic orders, isotope effects, solvent effects, linear free energy relationship; product studies, stereochemistry; reactive intermediates; rapid reactions. May be coscheduled with CHEM 246. Prerequisites: CHEM 40C, 40CH, or 41C.

CHEM 151. Molecules that Changed the World (4)
A look at some of nature’s most intriguing molecules and the ability to discover, synthesize, modify, and use them. The role of chemistry in society, and how chemical synthesis—the art and science of constructing molecules—shapes our world. Prerequisites: CHEM 40A, 40AH, or 41A.

CHEM 152. Synthetic Methods in Organic Chemistry (4)
A survey of reactions of particular utility in the organic laboratory. Emphasis is on methods of preparation of carbon-carbon bonds and oxidation reduction sequences. May be coscheduled with CHEM 252. Prerequisites: CHEM 40C, 40CH, or 41C.

CHEM 154. Mechanisms of Organic Reactions (4)
A qualitative approach to the mechanisms of various organic reactions; substitutions, additions, eliminations, condensations, rearrangements, oxidations, reductions, free-radical reactions, and photochemistry. Includes considerations of molecular structure and reactivity, synthetic methods, spectroscopic tools, and stereochemistry. The topics emphasized will vary from year to year. This is the first quarter of the advanced organic chemistry sequence. May be coscheduled with CHEM 254. Prerequisites: CHEM 40C, 40CH, or 41C.

CHEM 155. Synthesis of Complex Molecules (4)
This course discusses planning economic routes for the synthesis of complex organic molecules. The uses of specific reagents to control stereochemistry will be outlined and recent examples from the primary literature will be highlighted. (May not be offered every year.) May be coscheduled with CHEM 255. Prerequisites: CHEM 152 or 154.

CHEM 156. Structure and Properties of Organic Molecules (4)
Introduction to the measurement and theoretical correlation of the physical properties of organic molecules. Topics covered include molecular geometry, molecular-orbital theory, orbital hybridization, aromaticity, chemical reactivity, stereochemistry, infrared and electronic spectra, photochemistry, and nuclear magnetic resonance. May be coscheduled with CHEM 256. Prerequisites: CHEM 40C, 40CH, or 41C.

CHEM 157. Bioorganic and Natural Products Chemistry (4)
A comprehensive survey of modern bioorganic and natural products chemistry. Topics will include biosynthesis of natural products, molecular recognition, and small molecule-biomolecule interactions. May be coscheduled with CHEM 257. Prerequisites: CHEM 40C, 40CH, or 41C.

CHEM 158. Applied Spectroscopy (4)
Intensive coverage of modern spectroscopic techniques used to determine the structure of organic molecules. Problem solving and interpretation of spectra will be emphasized. May be coscheduled with CHEM 258. Prerequisites: CHEM 40C, 40CH, or 41C.

CHEM 163. Introduction to Mass Spectrometry (4)
Introduction to fundamental theory and applications of mass spectrometry. The basics of mass spectrometry instrumentation will be discussed. Different types of mass spectrometers and their advantages for studying certain types of molecules will be examined. Various data analysis platforms will be reviewed and applications relevant for the biotech industry will be discussed. This course will have a particular focus on protein-based mass spectrometry. May be coscheduled with CHEM 263. Prerequisites: CHEM 41C.

CHEM 164. Structural Biology of Viruses (4)
An introduction to virus structures, how they are determined, and how they facilitate the various stages of the viral life cycle from host recognition and entry to replication, assembly, release, and transmission to uninfected host cells. (May not be offered every year.) May be coscheduled with CHEM 264. Prerequisites: BIBC 100 or CHEM 114A and BIBC 102 or CHEM 114B and BIMM 100 or CHEM 114C.

CHEM 165. 3-D Cryo-Electron Microscopy of Macromolecules and Cells (4)
The resolution revolution in cryo-electron microscopy has made this a key technology for the high-resolution determination of structures of macromolecular complexes, organelles, and cells. The basic principles of transmission electron microscopy, modern cryo-electron microscopy, image acquisition, and 3-D reconstruction will be discussed. Examples from the research literature using this state-of-the-art technology will also be discussed. Prerequisites: CHEM 114A or BIBC 100.

CHEM 167. Medicinal Chemistry (4)
Basics of medicinal chemistry, emphasizing rigorous descriptions of receptor-protein structure, interactions, and dynamics; their implications for drug development; and an integrated treatment of pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic considerations in drug design. Treats computational approaches as well as practical experimental approaches. Prerequisites: CHEM 40C, 40CH, or 41C and CHEM 114A.

CHEM 168. Drug Synthesis and Design (4)
Practical methods to make drugs currently in use and to design future drugs. Treats both chemical synthesis and biologics like monoclonal antibodies. Topics include fragment-based screening, solid phase synthesis, directed evolution, and bioconjugation as well as efficacy, metabolism, and toxicity. Prerequisites: CHEM 40C, 40CH, or 41C and CHEM 114A.

CHEM 171. Environmental Chemistry I (4)
An introduction to chemical concerns in nature with emphasis on atmospheric issues like air pollution, chlorofluorocarbons and the ozone hole, greenhouse effects and climate change, impacts of radioactive waste, sustainable resource usage, and risks and benefits of energy sources. Students may only receive credit for one of the following: CHEM 149A or 171. Prerequisites: CHEM 6C or 6CH.

CHEM 172. Environmental Chemistry II (4)
An introduction to the environmental chemistry of solid and liquid environments and their global cycles of major elements. The chemistry cycles are analyzed present, past, and future and their perturbations by society, volcanoes, and extinction events. Non-earth environments are included. Recommended preparation: CHEM 171. Prerequisites: CHEM 6C or 6CH.

CHEM 173. Atmospheric Chemistry (4)
Chemical principles applied to the study of atmospheres. Atmospheric photochemistry, radical reactions, chemical lifetime determinations, acid rain, greenhouse effects, ozone cycle, and evolution are discussed. May be coscheduled with CHEM 273. Prerequisites: CHEM 6C or 6CH.

CHEM 174. Chemical Principles of Marine Systems (4)
(Cross-listed with SIO 141.) Introduction to the chemistry and distribution of the elements in seawater, emphasizing basic chemical principles such as electron structure, chemical bonding, and group and periodic properties and showing how these affect basic aqueous chemistry in marine systems. Students may not receive credit for SIO 141 and CHEM 174. Prerequisites: CHEM 6C or 6CH.

CHEM 185. Quantum Chemistry Lab (4)
Course in computational methods, with focus on quantum chemistry. The course content is built on a background in mathematics and physical chemistry, and provides an introduction to computational theory, ab initio methods, and semiempirical methods. The emphasis is on applications and reliability. May be coscheduled with CHEM 285. Prerequisites: CHEM 126 or 126B or 130 or 133 and MATH 20C or 31BH. (May not be offered every year.)

CHEM 186. Molecular Simulations Lab (4)
Course in computational methods, with focus on molecular simulations. The course content is built on a background in mathematics and physical chemistry, and provides an introduction to computational theory and molecular mechanics. The emphasis is on applications and reliability. May be coscheduled with CHEM 286. Prerequisites: MATH 20C and CHEM 126 or CHEM 126B or CHEM 130 or CHEM 133.

CHEM 187. Foundations of Teaching and Learning Science (4)
(Cross-listed with EDS 122.) Examine theories of learning and how they are important in the science classroom. Conceptual development in the individual student, as well as the development of knowledge in the history of science. Key conceptual obstacles in science will be explored. Prerequisites: CHEM 6C or 6CH and CHEM 96 or EDS 31.

CHEM 188. Capstone Seminar in Science Education (4)
(Cross-listed with EDS 123.) In the lecture and observation format, students continue to explore the theories of learning in the science classroom. Conceptual development is fostered, as well as continued development of knowledge of science history. Students are exposed to the science of teaching in science in actual practice. Prerequisites: CHEM 6C or 6CH and CHEM 187 or EDS 122.

CHEM 190. Mathematics for Physical Chemistry (4)
Focus on select topics from among numerous areas relevant to chemistry, including linear algebra, probability theory, group theory, complex variables, Laplace and Fourier transforms, partial differential equations, stochastic variables, random walks, and others. May be coscheduled with CHEM 290. Prerequisites: MATH 20D.

CHEM 192. Senior Seminar in Chemistry and Biochemistry (1)
The Senior Seminar Program is designed to allow senior undergraduates to meet with faculty members in a small group setting to explore an intellectual topic in chemistry or biochemistry. May be taken for credit up to four times, with a change in topic, and permission of the department. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: department stamp and/or consent of the instructor.

CHEM 194. Special Topics in Chemistry (2)
Selected topics in the field of chemistry. Course will vary in title and content. Students are expected to actively participate in course discussions, read, and analyze primary literature. Current subtitles will be listed on the Schedule of Classes. May be taken for credit up to four times as topics vary. Students may not receive credit for the same topic.

CHEM 195. Methods of Teaching Chemistry (4)
An introduction to teaching chemistry. Students are required to attend a weekly class on methods of teaching chemistry and will teach a discussion section of one of the lower-division chemistry courses. Attendance at lecture of the lower-division course in which the student is participating is required. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

CHEM 196. Reading and Research in Chemical Education (2 or 4)
Independent literature or discipline-based education research by arrangement with, and under the direction of, a member of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry faculty. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: upper-division standing, 2.5 minimum GPA, consent of instructor and department.

CHEM 197. Chemistry Internship (2 or 4)
An internship program that provides work experience with public/private sector employers. Subject to the availability of positions, students will work in a local company under the supervision of a faculty member and site supervisor. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit a maximum of three times. Prerequisites: Completion of ninety units with a GPA of 2.5, and a completed and approved Special Studies form (UC San Diego Application for Enrollment Special Studies Courses 197, 198, 199), and department stamp.

CHEM 198. Directed Group Study in Chemistry (1–4)
Directed group study on a topic or in a field not included in the regular department curriculum, by arrangement with a chemistry and biochemistry faculty member. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: department approval required and a completed and approved Special Studies form (UC San Diego Application for Enrollment Special Studies Courses 197, 198, 199).

CHEM 199. Reading and Research in Chemistry (2 or 4)
Independent literature or laboratory research by arrangement with, and under the direction of, a member of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry faculty. Students must register on a P/NP basis. Prerequisites: upper-division standing, 2.5 minimum GPA, consent of instructor and department and the completion of the online CHEM 199 application.)

CLX 87. First-year Seminar in Chicano and Latinx Studies (1)
The First-year Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year seminars can be offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter.

CHIN 10AN. First-Year Chinese I (5)
Introductory Mandarin Chinese language course for students with no Chinese language experience. Part one of a three-quarter sequence that covers foundational pronunciation, grammar, and vocabulary through interactive classes. Prerequisites: placement interview required for department approval to enroll.

CHIN 10AM. First-Year Chinese for Mandarin Speakers I (5)
Introductory Mandarin Chinese language course intended for students with some oral proficiency but who have not had formal written training in Mandarin. Part one of a three-quarter sequence focusing on increasing literacy with basic characters and covering fundamentals of Chinese grammar, pronunciation, and vocabulary through interactive classes. Prerequisites: placement interview required for department approval to enroll.

CHIN 10AD. First-Year Chinese for Dialect Speakers I (5)
Introductory Mandarin Chinese language course intended for students with some proficiency in a Chinese dialect other than Mandarin. Part one of a three-quarter sequence covering fundamentals of pronunciation, Chinese grammar, and vocabulary through interactive classes. Prerequisites: placement interview required for department approval to enroll.

CHIN 10BN. First-Year Chinese II (5)
Introductory Mandarin Chinese language course for students with little to no Chinese language experience. Part two of a three-quarter sequence that covers foundational pronunciation, grammar, and vocabulary through interactive classes. Prerequisites: previous course or department approval through placement interview.

CHIN 10BM. First-Year Chinese for Mandarin Speakers II (5)
Introductory Mandarin Chinese language course intended for students with some oral proficiency but who have not had significant written training in Mandarin; part two of a three-quarter sequence focusing on increasing literacy with additional characters. Prerequisites: previous course or department approval through placement interview.

CHIN 10BD. First-Year Chinese for Dialect Speakers II (5)
Introductory Mandarin Chinese language course intended for students with some proficiency in a Chinese dialect other than Mandarin. Part two of a three-quarter sequence that expands competence in Chinese grammar, pronunciation, and vocabulary through interactive classes. Prerequisites: previous course or department approval through placement interview.

CHIN 10CN. First-Year Chinese III (5)
Introductory Mandarin Chinese language course for students with some basic Chinese language experience. Part three of a three-quarter sequence that covers foundational pronunciation, grammar, and vocabulary through interactive classes. Prerequisites: previous course or department approval through placement interview.

CHIN 10CM. First-Year Chinese for Mandarin Speakers III (5)
Introductory Mandarin Chinese language course intended for students with some oral proficiency but who have not had significant written training in Mandarin. Part three of a three-quarter sequence focusing on increasing literacy with additional characters and expanding competence in Chinese grammar, pronunciation, and vocabulary through interactive classes. Prerequisites: previous course or department approval through placement interview.

CHIN 10CD. First-Year Chinese for Dialect Speakers III (5)
Introductory Mandarin Chinese language course intended for students with some proficiency in a Chinese dialect other than Mandarin. Part three of a three-quarter sequence that expands competence in Chinese grammar, pronunciation, and vocabulary through interactive classes. Prerequisites: previous course or department approval through placement interview.

CHIN 20AN. Second-Year Chinese I (4)
Intermediate Mandarin Chinese language course for students with some basic formal study of Chinese language; part one of a three-quarter sequence that continues to expand oral and written communicative competence in Mandarin Chinese through interactive classes. Prerequisites: previous course or department approval through placement interview.

CHIN 20AM. Second-Year Chinese for Mandarin Speakers I (4)
Intermediate Mandarin Chinese language course intended for students with some oral proficiency but little formal written training in Mandarin; part one of a three-quarter sequence focusing on increasing literacy with additional characters and expanding oral and written communicative competence in Mandarin Chinese through interactive classes. Prerequisites: previous course or department approval through placement interview.

CHIN 20AD. Second-Year Chinese for Dialect Speakers I (4)
Intermediate Mandarin Chinese language course intended for students with some proficiency in a Chinese dialect other than Mandarin; part one of a three-quarter sequence that continues to expand oral and written communicative competence in Mandarin Chinese through interactive classes. Prerequisites: previous course or department approval through placement interview.

CHIN 20BN. Second-Year Chinese II (4)
Intermediate Mandarin Chinese language course for students with some basic formal study of Chinese language; part two of a three-quarter sequence that continues to expand oral and written communicative competence in Mandarin Chinese through interactive classes. Prerequisites: previous course or department approval through placement interview.

CHIN 20BM. Second-Year Chinese for Mandarin Speakers II (4)
Intermediate Mandarin Chinese language course intended for students with some oral proficiency but little formal written training in Mandarin; part two of a three-quarter sequence focusing on increasing literacy with additional characters and expanding oral and written communicative competence in Mandarin Chinese through interactive classes. Prerequisites: previous course or department approval through placement interview.

CHIN 20BD. Second-Year Chinese for Dialect Speakers II (4)
Intermediate Mandarin Chinese language course intended for students with some proficiency in a Chinese dialect other than Mandarin; part two of a three-quarter sequence that continues to expand oral and written communicative competence in Mandarin Chinese through interactive classes. Prerequisites: previous course or department approval through placement interview.

CHIN 20CN. Second-Year Chinese III (4)
Intermediate Mandarin Chinese language course for students with some basic formal study of Chinese language; part three of a three-quarter sequence that continues to expand oral and written communicative competence in Mandarin Chinese through interactive classes. Prerequisites: previous course or department approval through placement interview.

CHIN 20CM. Second-Year Chinese for Mandarin Speakers III (4)
Intermediate Mandarin Chinese language course intended for students with some oral proficiency but little formal written training in Mandarin; part three of a three-quarter sequence focusing on increasing literacy with additional characters and expanding oral and written communicative competence in Mandarin Chinese through interactive classes. Prerequisites: previous course or department approval through placement interview.

CHIN 20CD. Second-Year Chinese for Dialect Speakers III (4)
Intermediate Mandarin Chinese language course intended for students with some proficiency in a Chinese dialect other than Mandarin; part three of a three-quarter sequence that continues to expand oral and written communicative competence in Mandarin Chinese through interactive classes. Prerequisites: previous course or department approval through placement interview.

CHIN 100AN. Third-Year Chinese I (4)
Advanced Mandarin Chinese language course for students who have received some prior formal training in Mandarin. Part one of a three-quarter sequence that further expands more advanced oral and written communicative competence through study of topics including the history of Chinese language and society, education, and literature. Prerequisites: previous course or department approval through placement interview.

CHIN 100AM. Third-Year Chinese for Mandarin and Dialect Speakers I (4)
Advanced Mandarin Chinese language course for students who have received some prior formal training in Mandarin. Part one of a three-quarter sequence that further expands more advanced oral and written communicative competence through study of topics including the history of Chinese language and society, education, and literature. Prerequisites: previous course or department approval through placement interview.

CHIN 100BN. Third-Year Chinese II (4)
Advanced Mandarin Chinese language course for students who have received some prior training in Mandarin. Part two of a three-quarter sequence that further expands more advanced oral and written communicative competence through study of topics including the history of Chinese language and society, education, and literature. Prerequisites: previous course or department approval through placement interview.

CHIN 100BM. Third-Year Chinese for Mandarin and Dialect Speakers II (4)
Advanced Mandarin Chinese language course intended for students with some oral or written proficiency in Mandarin or another Chinese dialect. Part two of a three-quarter sequence that further expands more complex oral and written communicative competence through study of topics including the history of Chinese language and society, education, and literature. Prerequisites: previous course or department approval through placement interview.

CHIN 100CN. Third-Year Chinese III (4)
Advanced Mandarin Chinese language course for students who have received some prior training in Mandarin. Part three of a three-quarter sequence that further expands more advanced oral and written communicative competence through study of topics including the history of Chinese language and society, education, and literature. Prerequisites: previous course or department approval through placement interview.

CHIN 100CM. Third-Year Chinese for Mandarin and Dialect Speakers III (4)
Advanced Mandarin Chinese language course intended for students with some oral or written proficiency in Mandarin or another Chinese dialect. Part three of a three-quarter sequence that further expands more complex oral and written communicative competence through study of topics including the history of Chinese language and society, education, and literature. Prerequisites: previous course or department approval through placement interview.

CHIN 160/260. Late Imperial and Twentieth-Century Chinese Historical Texts (4)
This course introduces the primary sources used by historians of late Imperial and twentieth-century Chinese history. Reading material includes diaries, newspaper articles, Qing documents, gazetteers, essays, speeches, popular fiction, journal articles, scholarly prose, and field surveys. May be repeated for credit. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: advanced knowledge of Chinese language and consent of instructor.

CHIN 165A. Business Chinese I (4)
Advanced Mandarin Chinese language course that focuses on oral and written communication skills for business, including introduction to modern business terminology and social conventions. Prerequisites: any one of the following or department approval through placement interview: CHIN 100CM, CHIN 100CN, CHIN 165B-C, CHIN 185A-B-C.

CHIN 165B. Business Chinese II (4)
Advanced Mandarin Chinese language course that focuses on oral and written communication skills for business, including introduction to modern business terminology and social conventions. Prerequisites: any one of the following or department approval through placement interview: CHIN 100CM, CHIN 100CN, CHIN 165A, CHIN 165C, CHIN 185A-B-C.

CHIN 165C. Business Chinese III (4)
Advanced Mandarin Chinese language course that focuses on oral and written communication skills for business, including introduction to modern business terminology and social conventions. Prerequisites: any one of the following or department approval through placement interview: CHIN 100CM, CHIN 100CN, CHIN 165A-B, CHIN 185A-B-C.

CHIN 169A. Medical Chinese I (4)
Advanced Mandarin Chinese language course that focuses on conversational medical Chinese for students interested in medicine and health care. Designed to prepare students to speak, listen, and read effectively in a Chinese medical environment and build necessary medical vocabulary. Prerequisites: any one of the following or department approval through placement interview: CHIN 165A-B-C, CHIN 169B, CHIN 182A-B-C. 

CHIN 169B. Medical Chinese II (4)
Advanced Mandarin Chinese language course that focuses on conversational medical Chinese for students interested in medicine and health care. Designed to prepare students to speak, listen, and read effectively in a Chinese medical environment and build necessary medical vocabulary. Prerequisites: any one of the following or department approval through placement interview: CHIN 165A-B-C, CHIN 169A, CHIN 182A-B-C.

CHIN 182A. Classical Chinese I (4)
Advanced Mandarin Chinese language course that focuses on building familiarity with classical Chinese. Basic structures and function words are taught through fables of the pre-Qing period. Prerequisites: any one of the following or department approval through placement interview: CHIN 165A-B-C, CHIN 169A-B, CHIN 182B-C, CHIN 185A-B-C.

CHIN 182B. Classical Chinese II (4)
Advanced Mandarin Chinese language course that focuses on building familiarity with classical Chinese. Selections from Kongzi, Mengzi, and work of other philosophers will be taught. Focus is on structures, function words, and overall comprehension of a text. Prerequisites: any one of the following or department approval through placement interview: CHIN 165A-B-C, CHIN 169A-B, CHIN 182A, CHIN 182C, CHIN 185A-B-C.

CHIN 182C. Classical Chinese III (4)
Advanced Mandarin Chinese language course that focuses on building familiarity with classical Chinese. Selections from later periods like Shiji and poetry will be introduced. Focus is on structures, function words, and overall comprehension of a text. Prerequisites: any one of the following or department approval through placement interview: CHIN 165A-B-C, CHIN 169A-B, CHIN 182A-B, CHIN 185A-B-C.

CHIN 185A. Readings in Chinese Culture and Society I (4)
Advanced Mandarin Chinese language course that engages students on topics related to Chinese culture and society past and present through study of original texts and other media that expand reading and vocabulary skills on topics of interest. Prerequisites: any one of the following or department approval through placement interview: CHIN 100CM, CHIN 100CN, CHIN 165A-B-C, CHIN 185B-C.

CHIN 185B. Readings in Chinese Culture and Society II (4)
Advanced Mandarin Chinese language course that engages students on topics related to Chinese culture and society past and present through study of original texts and other media that expand reading and vocabulary skills on topics of interest. Prerequisites: any one of the following or department approval through placement interview: CHIN 100CM, CHIN 100CN, CHIN 165A-B-C, CHIN 185A, CHIN 185C.

CHIN 185C. Readings in Chinese Culture and Society III (4)
Advanced Mandarin Chinese language course that engages students on topics related to Chinese culture and society past and present through study of original texts and other media that expand reading and vocabulary skills on topics of interest. Prerequisites: any one of the following or department approval through placement interview: CHIN 100CM, CHIN 100CN, CHIN 165A-B-C, CHIN 185A-B.

CHIN 186A. Readings in Chinese Economics, Politics, and Trade I (4)
Advanced Mandarin Chinese language course designed for students interested in international trade or social science that engages students on topics related to Chinese economics, politics, and trade through study of original texts and other media that expand specialized vocabulary development, reading, and translating. Prerequisites: any one of the following or department approval through placement interview: CHIN 100CM, CHIN 100CN, CHIN 186B-C.

CHIN 186B. Readings in Chinese Economics, Politics, and Trade II (4)
Advanced Mandarin Chinese language course designed for students interested in international trade or social science that engages students on topics related to Chinese economics, politics, and trade through study of original texts and other media that expand specialized vocabulary development, reading, and translating. Prerequisites: any one of the following or department approval through placement interview: CHIN 100CM, CHIN 100CN, CHIN 186A, CHIN 186C.

CHIN 186C. Readings in Chinese Economics, Politics, and Trade III (4)
Advanced Mandarin Chinese language course designed for students interested in international trade or social science that engages students on topics related to Chinese economics, politics, and trade through study of original texts and other media that expand specialized vocabulary development, reading, and translating. Prerequisites: any one of the following or department approval through placement interview: CHIN 100CM, CHIN 100CN, CHIN 186A, CHIN 186CB.

CHIN 196. Directed Thesis Research (4)
Bachelor’s thesis, under the direction of a faculty member in Chinese studies. Prerequisites: consent of instructor. (F,W,S)

CHIN 198. Directed Group Study in Chinese Studies (2 or 4)
Study of specific aspects in Chinese civilization not covered in regular course work, under the direction of faculty members in Chinese studies. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

CHIN 199. Independent Study in Chinese Studies (2 or 4)
The student will undertake a program of research or advanced reading in selected areas in Chinese studies under the supervision of a faculty member of the Program in Chinese Studies. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

CLAS 87. First-year Seminar in Classical Studies (1)
The First-year Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year seminars can be offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter.

CLAS 109. Greek Seminar (4)
Readings in Greek covering specific topics in ancient Greek literature, philosophy, history, and religion. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTGK 1, 2, 3, or equivalent.

CLAS 110. Latin Seminar (4)
Readings in Latin covering specific topics in ancient Latin literature, philosophy, history, and religion. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTLA 1, 2, 3, or equivalent.

CLAS 119. Early Christianity (4)
This course examines the emergence, growth, and development of Christianity in its first centuries. The class explores issues of community, doctrine, and practice; inter-religious and intra-religious tension and conflict; and cultural continuity and change.

CLAS 120. Classical Diversities (4)
This course explores the questions of race and gender in the classical world, together with their impact on the study of the classics in the making of American identity.

CLAS 121R. World Wisdom Traditions (4)
This online course explores wisdom traditions of the premodern world, examining formative ideas on the art of living well and contrasting worldwide teachings on what it means to be human, one's obligations to others, and the ideal relationship with the natural world.

CLAS 196A-B. Directed Honors Thesis in Classical Studies (4)
BA honors thesis research under the direction of a member of a classical studies program faculty. Prerequisites: acceptance into the classical studies honors program and consent of instructor.

CLAS 198. Directed Group Study in Classical Studies (4)
Directed group study on a topic not generally included in the regular curriculum. Student must make arrangements with individual faculty members. May be repeated for credit as topics vary.

CLAS 199. Independent Study in Classical Studies (4)
Independent study on a topic not generally included in the regular curriculum. Student must make arrangements with individual faculty members. May be repeated for credit as topics vary.

CCS 101. Carbon Neutrality Initiative at University of California (2)
The University of California-wide goals of the Carbon Neutrality Initiative are introduced through a series of modules where students learn basic principles of carbon neutrality, participate in seminars with campus operations staff, and tour relevant campus infrastructure including the UC San Diego microgrid, Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certified buildings, and sustainable transportation efforts. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. 

CCS 102. Research Perspectives on Climate Change (2)
This course introduces students to exciting and current research topics related to climate change as presented by faculty and researchers across UC San Diego. The course is offered as a series of reading topics followed by seminars on original research presented by faculty and researchers. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

CCS 123. Policy and Politics of Climate Change (4)
Climate change has forced decision makers in the public and private sectors to develop and adopt policies to help facilitate a transition to a clean energy economy and avoid some of the worst consequences of climate change. In this course we will discuss state, federal, and international policies related to climate change. The political context in which these policy responses have developed, and in which they will continue to evolve, will be emphasized throughout. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

CCS 197. Carbon Neutrality Internship (1–4)
A campus-based internship, typically designed by the student, that will help the university meet our stated carbon neutrality goals. The project can be developed either individually or as part of a team. A written contract involving all parties will include learning objectives, a paper or project outline, and means of supervision and progress evaluation. May be taken for credit up to three times for a maximum of eight units. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: CCS 101, CCS 102, and department approval.

CCS 199. Supervised Independent Study or Research in Climate Change Studies (2–4)
Independent reading or research on a topic related to climate change by special arrangement with a faculty member. May be taken for credit up to three times for a maximum of eight units. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: CCS 101, CCS 102, and department approval.

COGS 1. Introduction to Cognitive Science (4)
A team-taught course highlighting development of the field and the broad range of topics covered in the major. Example topics include addiction, analogy, animal cognition, human-computer interaction, language, neuroimaging, neural networks, reasoning, robots, and real-world applications.

COGS 2. Cognitive Neuroeconomics (4)
This course is an introduction to the neuroscience behind the principles of economic decision-making. The topics in this course are aimed at exploring the underlying cognitive and neural mechanisms that drive the decisions behind traditional economic models.

COGS 3. Introduction to Computing (4)
Covers the fundamental concepts that underlie all programming languages and provides an introduction to the essential information about algorithms and data structures. Students design and implement web applications using HTML5, CSS3, JavaScript, and Photoshop. No previous programming experience is required.

COGS 8. Hands-on Computing (4)
Introductory-level course that will give students insight into the fundamental concepts of algorithmic thinking and design. The course will provide the students with first-person, hands-on experience programming a web crawler and simple physical robots.

COGS 9. Introduction to Data Science (4)
Concepts of data and its role in science will be introduced, as well as the ideas behind data-mining, text-mining, machine learning, and graph theory, and how scientists and companies are leveraging those methods to uncover new insights into human cognition.

COGS 10. Cognitive Consequences of Technology (4)
This course examines the interrelationships of cognition and technology from the perspective of cognitive science. We address questions of importance for our increasingly technological society: How does technology shape our minds? How should what we know about our minds shape technology?

COGS 11. Minds and Brains (4)
How damaged and normal brains influence the way humans solve problems, remember or forget, pay attention to things; how they affect our emotions, and the way we use language in daily life.

COGS 12. Language, Culture, and Cognition (4)
Do people who speak different languages think differently? Does learning new languages change the way you think? Are some thoughts unthinkable without language? Course will bring together ideas and findings from psychology, linguistics, anthropology, neuroscience, and philosophy.

COGS 13. Field Methods: Studying Cognition in the Wild (4)
This course introduces students to multiple methods to investigate cognition and behavior in natural settings. Students will learn about ethnography, videography (video data collection, coding, and analysis), surveys design and conducting interviews, and how to move from observations to modeling.

COGS 14A. Introduction to Research Methods (4)
Introduction to the scientific method. Methods of knowledge acquisition, research questions, hypotheses, operational definitions, variables, control. Observation, levels of measurement, reliability, validity. Experimentation and design: between-groups, within-subjects, quasi-experimental, factorial, single-subject. Correlational and observational studies. Ethics in research.

COGS 14B. Introduction to Statistical Analysis (4)
Introduction to descriptive and inferential statistics. Tables, graphs, measures of central tendency and variability. Distributions, Z-scores, correlation, regression. Probability, sampling, logic of inferential statistics, hypothesis testing, decision theory. T-test, one and two-way Anova, nonparametric tests (Chi-square). Prerequisites: COGS 14A.

COGS 15. What the *#!?: An Uncensored Introduction to Language (4)
This course uses the study of swearing to introduce topics in language: how children learn it, why it changes over time, and how people pronounce and understand it. Students who believe they could be offended by the study of swearing and other taboo language might not find this course appropriate for them.

COGS 17. Neurobiology of Cognition (4)
Introduction to the organization and functions of the nervous system. Topics include molecular, cellular, developmental, systems, and behavioral neurobiology. Specifically, structure and function of neurons, peripheral and central nervous systems, sensory, motor, and control systems, learning and memory mechanisms. (Students may not receive credit for both BILD12 and COGS 17. This course fulfills general-education requirements for Marshall and Roosevelt Colleges as well as Warren by petition.)

COGS 18. Introduction to Python (4)
This class will teach fundamental Python programming skills and practices, including the “Zen of Python.” Students will focus on scientific computing and learn to write functions and tests, as well as how to debug code using the Jupyter Notebook programming environment. Students may receive credit for one of the following: BILD 62, COGS 18, CSE 8A, or CSE 6R. Recommended preparation: students with limited computing experience may take COGS 3.

COGS 20. Exploring the Musical Mind (4)
(Cross-listed with MUS 20.) How do we transform complex sounds into comprehensible and meaningful music? What physiological, neurological, cognitive, and cultural systems are involved? Why do we make music in such diverse ways around the globe? Does music have evolutionary or ecological significance? What is the relationship between music, motion, and emotions? This course explores contemporary understandings of how we hear and how we become musical and invites students to listen to new music in new ways. Students may not receive credit for both COGS 20 and MUS 20.

COGS 87. First-year Seminar in Cognitive Science (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year Student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students.

COGS 90. Undergraduate Seminar in Cognitive Science (1)
Special topics in cognitive science are discussed. P/NP grades only. (May be repeated when topics vary.)

COGS 91. SCANS Presents (1)
The department faculty and the Students for Cognitive and Neurosciences (SCANS) offer this seminar exploring issues in cognitive science. It includes informal faculty research presentations, investigations of topics not covered in the curriculum, and discussions on graduate school and careers. (May be repeated when topics vary.)

COGS 92. Resiliency in the Face of Adversity (2)
Psychological resiliency will be addressed both scientifically and pragmatically. Students will explore the way cognitive and behavioral factors contribute to one’s ability to cope with the stresses of life and emerge from them stronger than before. P/NP only.

COGS 99. Independent Study in Cognitive Science (2 or 4)
Independent literature or laboratory research by arrangement with and under direction of a Department of Cognitive Science faculty member. Prerequisites: lower-division standing, completion of thirty units of UC San Diego undergraduate study, a minimum UC San Diego GPA of 3.0, and a completed and approved Special Studies form.

COGS 100. Cyborgs Now and in the Future (4)
Covers the theories of situated, distributed, enactive, and embodied cognition. Explains how cyborgs are a natural consequence of our current understanding of embodied minds embedded in culturally shaped niches; how mental systems can be distributed over other people and things. Prerequisites: COGS 1 or COGS 10.

COGS 101A. Sensation and Perception (4)
An introduction to the experimental study of cognition with a focus on sensation and perception. Prerequisites: COGS 1.

COGS 101B. Learning, Memory, and Attention (4)
A survey of the experimental study of learning, memory, and attention. Topics include conditioning, automaticity, divided attention, memory systems, and the nature of mental representation. Prerequisites: COGS 1. Recommended: COGS 101A.

COGS 101C. Language (4)
An introduction to structure of natural language, and to the cognitive processes that underline its acquisition, comprehension, and production. This course covers findings from linguistics, computer science, psychology, and cognitive neuroscience to provide an integrated perspective on human language abilities. Prerequisites: COGS 1 and 14A.

COGS 102A. Cognitive Perspectives (4)
Explores current theoretical frameworks of high-level human cognition that emphasize how we interact with the material, social, and cultural world. Themes include the philosophy and history of cognitive science, the role of artifacts, and how cognition extends beyond the individual. Prerequisites: COGS 1 and COGS 10.

COGS 102B. Cognitive Ethnography (4)
Examines memory, reasoning, language, culture, planning, and interaction directly in everyday, real-world settings. Focuses on ethnographic methods, their history, and their application. The course work includes projects in which students make observations of real-world activity and analyze their cognitive significance. Prerequisites: COGS 102A.

COGS 102C. Cognitive Design Studio (6)
This project-based course focuses on learning and applying the process of human-centered cognitive design. Students work in teams to design and evaluate a prototype application or redesign an existing system. Emphasizes contextual inquiry, user research, ideation, iterative design, and evaluation. Prerequisites: COGS 102B.

COGS 107A. Neuroanatomy and Physiology (4)
This first course in the sequence focuses on principles of brain organization, from neurons to circuits to functional networks. It explores developmental plasticity, neuronal connectivity, cellular communication, complex signaling, and how these various dimensions form functional brain systems. Prerequisites: BILD 12 or COGS 17.

COGS 107B. Systems Neuroscience (4)
This course focuses on the electrical dynamics of neurons and how their patterns relate to perception, thought, and action. Neural activity patterns underlying vision, touch, audition, proprioception, and head orientation are examined in detail. Also examined are motor control, sleep/wake state production, action planning, learning, memory, attention, spatial cognition and function of the cerebellum, basal ganglia, and hippocampus. Prerequisites: COGS 107A.

COGS 107C. Cognitive Neuroscience (4)
This course reviews research investigating the neural bases for human mental processes, including processing of affective, social, linguistic, and visuospatial information, as well as memory, attention, and executive functions. Also discussed are brain development and brain aging, and the nature of intelligence and creativity. Prerequisites: COGS 107B and its prerequisites.

COGS 108. Data Science in Practice (4)
Data science is multidisciplinary, covering computer science, statistics, cognitive science and psychology, data visualization, artificial intelligence and machine learning, among others. This course teaches critical skills needed to pursue a data science career using hands-on programming and experimental challenges. Prerequisites: CSE 11 or CSE 8A or COGS 18 or DSC 10 or MAE 8.

COGS 109. Modeling and Data Analysis (4)
Exposure to the basic computational methods useful throughout cognitive science. Computing basic statistics, modeling learning individuals, evolving populations, communicating agents, and corpus-based linguistics will be considered. Prerequisites: COGS 14B, MATH 18 or MATH 31AH, and COGS 18 or CSE 7 or CSE 8A or CSE 11.

COGS 110. The Developing Mind (4)
(Cross-listed with HDS 121.) This course examines changes in thinking and perceiving the physical and social world from birth through childhood. Evidence of significant changes in encoding information, forming mental representations, and solving problems is culled from psychological research, cross-cultural studies, and cognitive science. Cross-listed course. HDS 121 has been renumbered from HDP 121. Students may receive credit for one of the following: COGS 110, HDS 121, or HDP 121. Prerequisites: COGS 1 or HDP 1 or HDS 1.

COGS 111. Beauty and the Brain (4)
What is beauty? The subjective experience of aesthetic appreciation dominates culture. But what determines this illusive quality? Why is it so important, how did it evolve, and how is it represented in the brain? Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

COGS 112. Humor (4)
In this course we will explore the psychology, philosophy, and evolutionary origins of humor and laughter. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

COGS 115. Neurological Development and Cognitive Change (4)
This course provides an overview of neurological development and explores the relations between physiological change and the experience for the child from the prenatal period through adolescence. Prerequisites: BILD 10 or BILD 12 or COGS 107A or COGS 107B or COGS 17 or HDP 110.

COGS 116. Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience (4)
This course will discuss the relationship between brain and cognitive development. Topics will include methods for studying the developing brain, how these methods have informed our understanding of cognitive development, the effects of environmental factors, and disorders of brain development. Prerequisites: COGS 107A and COGS 107B or PSYC 106.

COGS 118A. Supervised Machine Learning Algorithms (4)
This course introduces the mathematical formulations and algorithmic implementations of the core supervised machine learning methods. Topics in 118A include regression, nearest neighborhood, decision tree, support vector machine, and ensemble classifiers. COGS 118A-B may be taken in either order. Prerequisites: COGS 18 or CSE 8B or CSE 11 and MATH 18 or MATH 31AH and MATH 20E and MATH 180A and COGS 108 or COGS 109 or COGS 118B or CSE 150 or CSE 151 or CSE 158 or ECE 174 or ECE 175A.

COGS 118B. Introduction to Machine Learning (4)
This course, with COGS 118A, forms a rigorous introduction to machine learning. Topics in 118B include maximum likelihood estimation, Bayesian parameter estimation, clustering, principal component analysis, and some application areas. COGS 118A-B may be taken in either order. Prerequisites: BILD 62 or COGS 18 or CSE 11 or CSE 8B or CSE 11 and MATH 18 or MATH 31AH and MATH 20E and ECE 109 or ECON 120A or MAE 108 or MATH 180A or MATH 183 or MATH 186 and COGS 108 or COGS 109 or COGS 118A or COGS 188 or CSE 150A or CSE 151A or CSE 158 or CSE 158R or DSC 148 or ECE 174 or ECE 175A.

COGS 118C. Neural Signal Processing (4)
This course will cover theoretical foundations and practical applications of signal processing to neural data. Topics include EEG/field potential methods (filtering, Fourier (spectral) analysis, coherence) and spike train analysis (reverse correlation, spike sorting, multielectrode recordings). Some applications to neural imaging (optical microscopy, fMRI) data will also be discussed. Prerequisites: MATH 18 or MATH 31AH, COGS 14B or PSYC 60, and COGS 108 or COGS 109.

COGS 118D. Mathematical Statistics for Behavioral Data Analysis (4)
Statistical methods for analyzing behavioral data. A mathematically sophisticated course covering both classical and Bayesian statistical methods for estimation, hypothesis testing, regression, and model comparison. Emphasis on both mathematical understanding of statistical methods as well as common applications. Prerequisites: MATH 18 or MATH 31AH and MATH 180A and COGS 108 or COGS 109, or consent of instructor.

COGS 119. Programming for Experimental Research (4)
This course will help students in the behavioral sciences (cognitive science, psychology, linguistics, neuroscience, and related fields) learn how to program experiments and analyze and present data. Prerequisites: COGS 14B and MATH 18 or MATH 31AH and MAE 8.

COGS 120. Interaction Design (5)
Introduces fundamental methods and principles for designing, implementing, and evaluating user interfaces. Topics: user-centered design, rapid prototyping, experimentation, direct manipulation, cognitive principles, visual design, social software, software tools. Learn by doing: work with a team on a quarter-long design project. Recommended preparation: basic familiarity with HTML. Students may not receive credit for both COGS 120 and CSE 170. Prerequisites: COGS 108 or CSE 12 or DSC 30 and COGS 1 or COGS 10 or DSGN 1 or ENG 100D.

COGS 121. Human Computer Interaction Portfolio Design Studio (4)
Create a personal portfolio of web/mobile/product design projects, oral presentations, and practice pitches to stakeholders. Prerequisites: COGS 120 or CSE 170 and COGS 18 or CSE 8B or CSE 11 or DSC 30.

COGS 122. Start-up Studio (4)
Explores tools and processes for innovating novel business concepts to solve problems involving the interaction between humans and technology. Students will work with an interdisciplinary team to understand unmet user needs and to create a value proposition that balances technical feasibility, financial viability, and desirability. Prerequisites: DSGN 100 or COGS 187B or COGS 187A or COGS 120 or CSE 170.

COGS 123. Social Computing (4)
This course explores the intersection of social behavior and computational systems. Students will examine a range of organizational, technical, and business challenges related to social computing, and learn how to use tools to analyze, design, and build online communities. Prerequisites: COGS 102C or COGS 120 or COGS 187A or COGS 187B or DSGN 1.

COGS 124. HCI Technical Systems Research (4)
In this advanced project-based course, we study the state-of-the-art in research on technical systems for human-computer interaction (HCI). Students will deconstruct the systems described in top-tier HCI papers and work in teams to create novel technical systems of their own. Prerequisites: COGS 127 or COGS 121.

COGS 125. Advanced Interaction Design (4)
This is a studio class for students who are passionate about diving deep into interaction design and honing their design skills. Introduces social computing, input and interaction techniques, and information design. Students will regularly present work in a studio format. Prerequisites: CSE 11 or 8B and COGS 120 or CSE 170.

COGS 126. Thinking with Computers (4)
This course surveys the field of human-computer interaction and the ideas and technologies that have shaped its development. Prerequisites: COGS 120 or COGS 121 or CSE 170.

COGS 127. Data-Driven UX/Product Design (4)
Create a UX/product design case study for your portfolio; team project with user research, data science, prototyping, and user testing. Prerequisites: COGS 18 or CSE 11 or CSE 8B or DSC 30 and COGS 1 or COGS 187A or DSGN 1.

COGS 128. Information Visualization (4)
This course frames information visualization as a quintessential cognitive science problem within our interdisciplinary field. Students learn conceptual and practical aspects of creating high-quality, interactive information displays to support a variety of cognitive tasks and then apply them to real-world data. Prerequisites: COGS 10 or DSGN 1 and COGS 108.

COGS 137. Practical Data Science in R (4)
Learn coding for data analysis using the R programming language. Course focus will be on practical and applied skills in asking data-informed questions, data wrangling, data visualization, building statistical learning models, and communicating your findings to advance your career. Prerequisites: COGS 14B or MATH 11 or PSYC 60.

COGS 138. Neural Data Science (4)
Project-based course in which students will use computational notebooks to perform exploratory data analyses and to test hypotheses in large neuroscience datasets, including the differences between unique neuron types, leveraging text mining of the neuroscience literature, and human neuroimaging analyses. Prerequisites: BILD 62 or COGS 18 or CSE 6R or CSE 8A and COGS 118C or COGS 189 or DSC 120 or ECE 45 or MATH 144.

COGS 142. Animal Communication (4)
This course introduces the study of animal communication, the key terminology, the remarkable communicative systems that several animal species possess, and the key similarities and differences between human and non-human animals’ communications. Prerequisites: COGS 14A.

COGS 143. Animal Cognition (4)
Examines the contrasts and parallels between primates and cetaceans in sensorimotor constraints, neuroanatomy, field behavior, and cognition in the lab, with a focus on the demands of competition and cooperation that helped shape the evolution of social cognition. Students may not receive credit for COGS 143 and COGS 143GS. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

COGS 144. Social Cognition: A Developmental and Evolutionary Perspective (4)
This course presents the building blocks of social cognition from a developmental and evolutionary perspective and focuses on how and when children develop these abilities and how humans compare to other species such as great apes, birds, and dogs. Prerequisites: COGS 14A-B.

COGS 151. Analogy and Conceptual Systems (4)
Human thought and meaning are deeply tied to the capacity for mapping conceptual domains onto each other, inducing common schemas and performing mental simulation. This course examines major aspects of this cognitive activity including metaphor, conceptual blending, and embodied cognition. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

COGS 152. Cognitive Foundations of Mathematics (4)
How the human mind/brain creates mathematics: embodiment, innovation, and creativity. The emergence and power of abstract concepts, such as infinity, infinitesimals, imaginary numbers, or zero. Cognitive approaches that connect mathematics to human thought in general. Prerequisites: CHEM 96 or COGS 1 or MATH 95 or PHIL 1 or PSYC 1 or EDS (20S or 30 or 31).

COGS 153. Language Comprehension (4)
The processes and representations involved in understanding language—processing words, syntax, semantics, and discourse—are examined in light of evidence from both psychological experiments and computer simulations. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

COGS 154. Communication Disorders in Children and Adults (4)
Neural bases of language use in normal adults, and neural bases of language and communication development in normal children. Evidence on the language and communication deficits in adults (especially aphasia and dementia) and children (specific language impairment, focal brain injury, retardation, and autism). Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

COGS 155. Gesture and Cognition (4)
Spontaneous gestures and their relationship to speech, cognition, brain, and culture. The course covers, among others, gesture and language development, gesture and conceptual systems, speech-gesture coproduction and its brain bases, evolution of language, and gestural behavior in special populations. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

COGS 156. Language Development (4)
A comprehensive survey of theory, method and research findings on language development in children ranging from the earliest stages of speech perception and communication at birth to refinements in narrative discourse and conventional fluency through middle childhood and adolescence. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and background in development psychology and/or linguistics is recommended.

COGS 157. Music and the Mind (4)
Explores how humans (and other species) process music, including pitch, meter, emotion, motor aspects, links to language, brain activity. Students should have experience reading musical notation. Prerequisites: COGS 101A or COGS 101B or COGS 101C.

COGS 160. Upper-Division Seminar on Special Topics (4)
Special topics in cognitive science are discussed. (May be repeated when topics vary.) Prerequisites: department approval.

COGS 163. Metabolic Disorders of the Brain (4)
Research is showing that cellular metabolic processes are mediating normal and abnormal brain function. For example, neurocognitive disorders often co-occur with metabolic disturbances, such as insulin resistance, diabetes, and obesity. An understanding of these mechanisms will provide insight to new treatments for cognitive and neurological disorders. The course will cover topics on the role of abnormal cellular structure, genetic, epigenetic and pathogenic influences on synaptic signaling. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

COGS 164. Neurobiology of Motivation (4)
This course will address principles of motivation, valuation, and reward, spanning a large territory of topics, from rules of synaptic learning to classroom learning. Recommended preparation: courses in basic biology, physiology, COGS 107A or 107B or 107C, or courses in education. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

COGS 165. Neuroimaging of Cognition (4)
Introduction to functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) methods for cognitive neuroscience research. This course will cover basic aspects of the physics and biological principles underlying MRI and fMRI, technical aspects of experimental design and data collection for fMRI, as well as basic data processing and analysis approaches. Prerequisites: COGS 107B or COGS 107C or PSYC 106 or PSYC 108.

COGS 169. Genetic Information for Behavior: From Single Cells to Mammals (4)
Behavior draws on a wide range of genes acting as a complex source of information. Model organisms—bacteria, Paramecium, C. elegans, Drosophila, and mice—have provided insight into how genes influence both innate and learned behaviors. Prerequisites: COGS 1 and 107A or permission of instructor.

COGS 170. Brain Waves across Scales (4)
This course will provide an interactive and hands-on introduction to rhythms and large-scale electrical potentials of the brain. Topics will include the resonance properties of neurons, rhythmic interactions between neurons, the coordination of activity across large populations of neurons that is measurable in the local field potential (LFP) and electroencephalogram (EEG), the advantages of temporally coordinated neural activity, and relevant insights about the brain and cognitive disorders. Prerequisites: COGS 17 or BILD 12.

COGS 171. Mirror Neuron System (4)
This class will examine the neuroanatomy, physiology, and functional correlates of the human mirror neuron system and its putative role in social cognition, e.g., action understanding, empathy, and theory of mind. We will examine the developmental, neuroimaging, electrophysiological, as well as clinical evidence, for and against this hypothesis. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

COGS 172. Brain Disorders and Cognition (4)
A review of the patterns of impaired and intact cognitive abilities present in brain-damaged patients in terms of damage to one or more components of a model of normal cognitive functioning. Prerequisites: COGS 107A.

COGS 174. Drugs: Brain, Mind, and Culture (4)
This course explores how drugs interact with the brain/mind and culture. It covers evolutionary and historical perspectives, brain chemistry, pharmacology, expectancies and placebo effects, and models of addiction. It also provides a biopsychosocial survey of commonly used and abused substances. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

COGS 175. The Neuropsychological Basis of Alternate States of Consciousness (4)
This course will review the literature that correlates brain rhythms in the human EEG with aspects of cognition, behavioral states, neuropsycho-pharmacology, and psychopathology in order to understand the psychological and neurophysiological underpinnings of these experiences. Prerequisites: COGS 101A or COGS 107A.

COGS 176. From Sleep to Attention (4)
This course will combine an examination of the neural character of quiet and active sleep states and their potential functions with an examination of the different mechanisms by which the brain mediates attention to specific features of the world. Prerequisites: COGS 107A.

COGS 177. Space and Time in the Brain (4)
The course examines features of neural dynamics that map spatial and temporal relationships. Lectures will cover interval timing, mapping of item-to-observer position, mapping of observer-to-world position, and the conjunction of spatial and temporal coding in hippocampus. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

COGS 178. Genes, Brains, and Behavior (4)
Evidence for genetic mediation of behavioral and neural differences, mechanisms that may mediate these effects, and the roles of the environment and experience are discussed. Prerequisites: COGS 107A-B or consent of instructor.

COGS 179. Electrophysiology of Cognition (4)
Survey the theory and practice of using electrical recordings (event-related brain potentials) to study cognition and behavior including attention, language, mental chronometry, memory, and plasticity. Prerequisites: COGS 107A or COGS 17.

COGS 180. Decision Making in the Brain (4)
This course covers recent advances in the understanding of neural mechanisms and computational principles underlying the brain’s ability to make decisions. The role of various factors, as well as their neural encoding, will be considered, e.g., observation noise, reward, risk, internal uncertainty, emotional state, external incentives. Prerequisites: BILD 12 or COGS 17 and COGS 108 or COGS 109 or CSE 150A and MATH 18 or MATH 20B or MATH 31AH.

COGS 181. Neural Networks and Deep Learning (4)
This course will cover the basics about neural networks, as well as recent developments in deep learning including deep belief nets, convolutional neural networks, recurrent neural networks, long-short term memory, and reinforcement learning. We will study details of the deep learning architectures with a focus on learning end-to-end models for these tasks, particularly image classification. Students may receive credit for one of the following: COGS 181, CSE 151B, or CSE 154. Prerequisites: COGS 18 or CSE 11 or CSE 8B and MATH 18 or MATH 31AH and MATH 20E and MATH 180A and COGS 118A or COGS 118B or CSE 150 or CSE 151A or CSE 158 or ECE 174 or ECE 175A.

COGS 182. Introduction to Reinforcement Learning (4)
This course is an introduction to reinforcement learning, the subfield of machine learning concerned with how artificial agents learn to act in the world in order to maximize reward. Topics include MDPs, policy iteration, TD learning, Q-learning, function approximation, and deep RL. Prerequisites: COGS 18 or CSE 11 or CSE 8B and MATH 18 or MATH 31AH and MATH 180A and COGS 108 or COGS 109 or COGS 118B or CSE 150A or CSE 150B or CSE 151A or CSE 151B or CSE 158 or ECE 174 or ECE 175A.

COGS 184. Modeling the Evolution of Cognition (4)
This interdisciplinary course integrates data on evolutionary theory, hominid prehistory, primate behavior, comparative neuroanatomy, cognitive development, and collaboration. After lectures, readings, and discussion of the literature, students generate a detailed timeline of five million years of human cognitive evolution. Students may not receive credit for COGS 184 and COGS 184GS. Prerequisites: COGS 17 or COGS 107A or COGS 107B or COGS 107C or BILD 12.

COGS 185. Advanced Machine Learning Methods (4)
This course is an advanced seminar and project course that follows the introduction to machine learning courses. Advanced and new machine learning methods will be discussed and used. Prerequisites: COGS 118A.

COGS 186. Genetic Algorithms (4)
This course will teach in detail some of the key biology-inspired AI algorithms. It will cover genetic algorithms (GA), particle swarm optimization algorithms (PSO), and other optimization algorithms like simulated annealing and gradient descent. Prerequisites: COGS 108 or COGS 109.

COGS 187A. Usability and Information Architecture (4)
Examines the cognitive basis of successful web and multimedia design. Topics: information architecture, navigation, usability, graphic layout, transaction design, and how to understand user interaction. Prerequisites: COGS 18 or CSE 11 or CSE 8A and COGS 10 or DSGN 1.

COGS 187B. Practicum in Professional Web Design (4)
This course follows up on the basics of multimedia design taught in COGS 187A. Students will probe more deeply into selective topics, such as animation, navigation, graphical display of information, and narrative coherence. Prerequisites: COGS 187A or consent of instructor.

COGS 188. Artificial Intelligence Algorithms (4)
This class will cover a broad spectrum of machine learning algorithms. It builds on students’ previous exposure to machine learning. It covers new artificial intelligence algorithms ranging from topic models as used in the text data analysis to genetic algorithms. Students will not receive credit for both COGS 188 and CSE 151A. Prerequisites: COGS 109 or COGS 118A or COGS 118B.

COGS 189. Brain Computer Interfaces (4)
This course will discuss signal processing, pattern recognition algorithms, and human-computer interaction issues in EEG-based brain-computer interfaces. Other types of brain-computer interfaces will also be discussed. Prerequisites: COGS 108 or COGS 109 or COGS 118A or COGS 118B.

COGS 190A. Pre-Honors Project in Cognitive Science (4)
This course prepares students for the Cognitive Science Honors Program. The aim is to refine the research project and to teach students what a successfully written proposal entails. Students may be admitted to the Honors Program contingent upon completion and progress in the course. See “Cognitive Science Honors Program” section for more information. Course should be taken for a letter grade. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; instructor and department approval.

COGS 190B. Honors Studies in Cognitive Science (4)
This course will allow cognitive science honors students to explore advanced issues in the field of cognitive science research. It will also provide the opportunity to develop a thesis on the topic of their choice and begin work under faculty supervision. See “Cognitive Science Honors Program” section for more information. Prerequisites: COGS 190A and formal admittance to the Cognitive Science Honors Program; department stamp.

COGS 190C. Honors Thesis in Cognitive Science (4)
This course will provide honors candidates an opportunity to complete the research on and preparation of an honors thesis under close faculty supervision. Oral presentation of student’s thesis is required to receive honors; additionally, student must receive grade of A– or better in 190B and 190C to receive honors. See “Cognitive Science Honors Program” section for more information. Prerequisites: COGS 190B with grade of A– or better and formal admittance to the Cognitive Science Honors Program.

COGS 190D. Preparation for Thesis Presentation (1)
This course is affiliated with the honors program (190A-B-C) and is required of honors students during spring quarter. Its aim is to prepare students to present research results to an audience. Emphasis will be on the oral presentation (organization, wording, graphics), but there will also be some discussion about written research reports. Seminar style format with occasional short lectures wherein students will practice oral presentations and provide constructive criticism to each other. Prerequisites: must be concurrently enrolled in 190B or 190C.

COGS 195. Instructional Apprenticeship in Cognitive Science (4)
Students, under the direction of the instructor, lead laboratory or discussion sections, attend lectures, and meet regularly with the instructor to help prepare course materials and grade papers and exams. Applications must be submitted to and approved by the department. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; 3.0 GPA; instructor and department approval.

COGS 197. Cognitive Science Internship (2 or 4)
The student will undertake a program of practical research in a supervised work environment. Topics to be researched may vary, but in each case the course will provide skills for carrying out these studies. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit up to three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; 2.5 GPA; department approval.

COGS 198. Directed Group Study in Cognitive Science (2 or 4)
This independent study course is for small groups of advanced students who wish to complete a one-quarter reading or research project under the mentorship of a faculty member. Students should contact faculty whose research interests them to discuss possible projects. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; 2.5 GPA; consent of instructor and department approval.

COGS 199. Special Project in Cognitive Science (2 or 4)
This independent study course is for individual, advanced students who wish to complete a one-quarter reading or research project under the mentorship of a faculty member. Students should contact faculty whose research interests them to discuss possible projects. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; 2.5 GPA; consent of instructor and department approval.

COMM 10. Introduction to Communication (4)
Introduction to the history, theory, and practice of communication, including language and literacy, representation and semiotics, mediated technologies and institutional formations, and social interaction. Integrates the study of communication with a range of media production (for example, writing, electronic media, film, performance). COMM 10 may be taken concurrently with the COMM A-B-C courses and intermediate electives. Course is offered fall, winter, and summer quarters.

COMM 20. Analysis of Media Forms and Cultures (4)
This course builds the critical skills to understand, analyze, and interpret audio/visual media by introducing students to the basic vocabulary and grammar of audio and moving image texts—how they create meaning through compositional form and narrative style—and key critical methodologies for interpreting media culture. Concepts and approaches covered will lay the groundwork for continued study in both scholarly communication areas and hands-on sound, film/video, and/or social media production.

COMM 30. Digital Media Literacy: Analyzing Forms, Practices, and Infrastructures of Mediated Public Life (4)
The role of digital communication in a democratic system, and the ways mass media both facilitate and inhibit the development of a viable public sphere. By exploring today’s digital communication dynamics, students will have the opportunity to become more mindful, active consumers of media and to feel empowered to be engaged participants in public life.

COMM 30GS. Global Digital Media Literacy: Analyzing Forms, Practices, and Infrastructures of Mediated Public Life (4)
This course focuses on the role of journalism in a global system, and the ways mass media both contribute to and inhibit the development of a viable public sphere and effective political process. With a focus on American as well as international news media, we will examine theories and functions of journalism as well as current issues facing today’s news producers.

COMM 80. Public Presentation and Persuasion—Speech and Debate (4)
Throughout history, important advances in a democratic society have emerged most often from civil, rigorous discussion, debate, and persuasion. Students develop research, critical thinking, presentation, public speaking, and argumentation skills through in-class practice speeches and debates, along with participation in intercollegiate speech and debate tournaments. May be taken for credit three times.

COMM 87. First-year Student Seminar in Communication (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students.

COMM 100A. Communication, the Person, and Everyday Life (4)
This course is a critical introduction to processes of interaction within lived and built environments. It includes historical survey of theories and methods including actor network-theory, conversation analysis, ethnography, ethnomethodology, cultural linguistics, performance, and social cognition. Course work may integrate scholarly study with production (e.g., in-context observation and research or audio/video production). Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 100B. Communication, Culture, and Representation (4)
This course is a critical introduction to the history of representation, surveying a range of theories and methods that have been used to understand and shape representational practices. The course will focus on relationships between form and content across various representational genres in shifting cultural contexts. Course work may integrate scholarly study with production (e.g., image-making or video/media production). Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 100C. Communication, Institutions, and Power (4)
This course is a critical introduction to structures of communication formed at the intersection of the state, the economy, and civil society. It includes a historical survey of communication and media industries; legal and policy-based arenas; and civic, political, and social organizations. Students will learn to assess the movement of power through these institutions and its effect in shaping society, culture, and politics. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 190. Junior Seminar in Communication (4)
The junior seminar enables a detailed examination of a specific topic from the field of communication selected by the instructor, exploring in greater depth theories and methods introduced in the core communication curriculum. Seminars are limited to thirty students with a heavy focus on class participation. Students complete a research project with a significant final product (typically a research paper). Prerequisites: junior or senior standing and COMM 10 and at least one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 101. Introduction to Audiovisual Media Practices (6)
This upper-division course is required as the gateway to all future communication media production courses. Students will learn about contemporary media practices such as film, video, digital/online, and social media production, and how these practices are formed by technical and social constraints. In the studio portion of this course, students will work hands-on with video and new media equipment to apply what they have learned. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 101A. Media Activism
In this course, we ask what techniques, strategies, and platforms we might engage to present these stories to a broader audience in an impactful and ethical way. While we engage with a specific web-based platform each quarter, the class maintains an emphasis on documentary storytelling and audiovisual production. The aim of this class is to demystify the idea of a “media activist” by guiding students through the development of their own media activism. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and COMM 101.

COMM 101D. MPL: Nonlinear/Digital Editing (4)
This course will prepare students to edit on nonlinear editing facilities and introduce aesthetic theories of editing: time code editing, timeline editing on the Media 100, digital storage and digitization of audio and video, compression, resolution, and draft mode editing. By the end of the course students will be able to demonstrate mastery of the digital editing facilities. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and COMM 101. 

COMM 101E. MPL: Ethnographic Methods for Media Production (4)
This is a practical course on ethnographic fieldwork—obtaining informed consent, interviewing, negotiating, formulating a research topic, finding relevant literature, writing a research paper, and assisting others with their research. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and COMM 101. 

COMM 101K. MPL: Documentary Sketchbook (4)
Digital video is the medium used in this class both as a production technology and as a device to explore the theory and practice of documentary production. Technical demonstrations, lectures, production exercises, and readings will emphasize the interrelation between production values and ethics, problems of representation, and documentary history. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and COMM 101.

COMM 101M. MPL: Communication and Computers (4)
This course introduces students to computers as media of communication. Each quarter, students participate in a variety of networking activities designed to show the interactive potential of the medium. Fieldwork designed to teach basic methods is combined with readings designed to build a deeper theoretical understanding of computer-based communication. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 101N. MPL: Sound Production and Manipulation (4)
Advanced seminar in sound production, design, and editing. Students create projects by recording original sounds and editing on a Pro-Tools system. We consider the potential of sound in film, radio, TV, and on the web by reviewing work and reading sound theory. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and COMM 101.

COMM 101T. MPL: Topics in Production (4)
Specialized study in production with topics to be determined by the instructor for any given quarter. Students will use studio, editing rooms, cameras to construct a variety of in or outside studio productions that can include YouTube, Documentary shorts, Vimeo, with topics that show the effects on social issues. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: COMM 101 or COGN 22 or VIS 70N prerequisites can be taken concurrently by permission.

COMM 102B. MMPP: Audio Story and Podcasting Practicum (6)
Production-oriented course involving diverse audio media forms. Critically analyze journalistic podcasts, features, documentaries, diaries, place-casts, and news shorts to evaluate what makes for compelling and effective audio as a contemporary storytelling form. Students will gain technical and production skills to facilitate their own creativity in the audio sphere. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and COMM 101.

COMM 102C. MMPP: Practicum in New Media and Community Life (6)
A combined lecture/lab in a specially designed after-school setting in southeastern San Diego working with children and adults. Students design new media and produce special projects, and explore issues related to human development, social justice, and community life. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: none

COMM 102D. MMPP: Practicum in Child Development (6)
A combined lecture/lab course on after-school learning, social change, and community-based research. Students are expected to participate in a supervised after-school setting at one of four community labs in San Diego County. Students will learn ethnographic field methods, develop culturally relevant curriculum, and work in diverse settings. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: none.

COMM 102M. MMPP: Studio Television (6)
This course offers students the opportunity to produce and engage in critical discussions around various television production formats. We will study and produce a variety of projects, including public service announcements, panel programs, scripted drama, and performance productions. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and COMM 101 or COGN 22 or VIS 70N.

COMM 102P. MMPP: Television Analysis and Production (6)
An introduction to the techniques and conventions common in television production with equal emphasis on method and content. Studio sessions provide students with opportunities to experiment in framing subject matter through a variety of cinematographic methods. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and COMM 101 or COGN 22 or VIS 70N.

COMM 102T. MMPP: Television Documentary (6)
An advanced television course that examines the history, form, and function of the television documentary in American society. Experimentation with documentary techniques and styles requires prior knowledge of television or film production. Laboratory sessions apply theory and methods in the documentary genre via technological process. Integrates research, studio, and field experience of various media components. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and COMM 101 or COGN 22 or VIS 70N.

COMM 103D. CM: Documentary History and Theory (4)
History of nonfiction film and video. Through film and written texts, we survey the nonfiction film genre, considering technological innovations, ethical issues, and formal movements related to these representations of the “real.” Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 103E. CM: History of Electronic Media (4)
This course considers the social, cultural, economic, and technological contexts that have shaped electronic media, from the emergence of radio and television to their convergence through the internet, and how these pervasive forms of audiovisual culture have impacted American society. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 103F. CM: How to Read a Film (4)
This course increases our awareness of the ways we interpret or make understanding from movies to enrich and increase the means by which one can enjoy and comprehend movies. We will talk about movies and explore a range of methods and approaches to film interpretation. Readings will emphasize major and diverse theorists, including Bazin, Eisenstein, Cavell, and Mulvey. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 104D. CMS: Asia (4)
The development of media systems in Asia, focusing on India and China. Debates over nationalism, regionalism, globalization, new technologies, identity politics, censorship, privatization, and media piracy. Alignments and differences with North American and European media systems will also be considered. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 104E. CMS: Europe (4)
The development of media systems and policies in Europe. Differences between European and American journalism. Debates over the commercialization of television. The role of media in postcommunist societies in Eastern Europe. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 104F. CMS: Africa (4)
This course will critically examine the role of the mass media in sub-Saharan Africa in the areas of colonial rule, nationalist struggles, authoritarianism, and popular movements. It will examine general trends regionally and internationally, as well as individual national cases, from the early twentieth century to the internet news services of the information age. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 104G. CMS: Latin America and the Caribbean (4)
The development of media systems and policies in Latin America and the Caribbean. Debates over dependency and cultural imperialism. The news media and the process of democratization. Development of the regional television industry. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 104GS. CMS: Europe (4)
This course focuses on analyzing media systems in Europe from a comparative perspective and sensitizes students to important differences with respect to journalistic and political cultures. Students will explore political, social, and economic factors shaping particular media systems and assess their implications for different types of political reporting.

COMM 105G. CT: Computer Games Studies (4)
Course considers computer games both as media and as sites of communication. Games are studied through hands-on play and texts from a variety of disciplinary perspectives. Course encompasses commercial, academic, and independent games. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 105M. CT: Mobile Communication (4)
Movement is central to our lives. This course draws on the latest research into how we travel, trade, and move. Diverse topics will be covered, including kids in cars, the New York subway, and theories of mobility. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 105P. CT: Photographic Technologies (4)
This course examines photographic technologies as a set of instruments and practices that modern societies have developed and used to tell stories about themselves and make particular claims about truth and reality, focusing on the domains of science, policing, journalism, advertising, and self-expression. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 106A. CI: Introduction (4)
Course examines the organization of some of the many industries (e.g., film, music, gaming, and publishing) that make up the cultural landscape with an eye toward discerning the conditions that shape the production of cultural goods and services: how is production organized within cultural industries; how are products distributed; and what is the impact of both the organization and distribution of goods on the conditions of work and labor? Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 106C. CI: History Through Comics—Japan (4)
Pasts have been conveyed through various media for millennia. This course will use comics to explore how this medium impacts how we might learn and understand Japanese history. Topics discussed include memory, storytelling, perspective, and visuality. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 106D. CI: Data and Culture (4)
Advances in data science, AI, social media, and surveillance raise new and old issues about the role data plays in our lives. This course examines data as a socially and culturally situated practice, performed by people and institutions, with impacts that intersect issues of power, publics, representation, justice, culture industries, and social forces. The aim is to build on social and cultural theories to explore specific contemporary and historical cases around the uses and misuses of data. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 106E. CI: Data, Science, and Society (4)
Data and science have long played a role in societies, with advances in data science, AI, surveillance, and automation raising new and old issues. This course focuses on the relationship between science, technology, and society in an increasingly data-intensive world, including the human choices and social structures that shape its direction and application. Themes may include data and governance, expertise, epistemology, infrastructure, political economy, labor, inequality, and resistance. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 106F. CI: Film Industry (4)
A study of the social organization of the film industry throughout its history. Who makes films, by what criteria, and for what audience? The changing relationships between studios, producers, directors, writers, actors, editors, censors, distributors, audience, and subject matter of the films will be explored. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 106G. CI: Tourism: Global Industry and Cultural Form (4)
The largest industry in the world has far-reaching cultural ramifications. We will explore tourism’s history and its contemporary cultural effects, taking the perspective of the “toured” as well as that of the tourist. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 106I. CI: Internet Industry (4)
The political economy of the emergent internet industry, charted through analysis of its hardware, software, and services components. The course specifies leading trends and changing institutional outcomes by relating the internet industry to the adjoining media, telecommunications, and computer industries. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 106T. CI: Television Culture and the Public (4)
How and what does television communicate? Emphasis will be on contemporary US television programming, placed in comparative and historical context. Special topics may include TV genres, TV and politics, TV and other media. Frequent in-class screenings. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 106V. CI: TV Industry (4)
Course examines political economy of television throughout its history. How TV is made, who is involved, how is industry organized, how does it get regulated, distributed? Consider how these answers changed over time and look at recent influences of digital technologies. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 107. Visual Culture (4)
How visual images contribute to our understanding of the world and ourselves. Theoretical approaches from media studies, art history, gender studies, and social theory will be used to analyze cultures of science, art, mass media, and everyday life. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 108A. POB: Introduction (4)
How do political contests and debates come to be organized on and around bodies? In what sense is the natural body a sign system and how does its organization represent and reproduce cultural values, moral assumptions, social relations, and economic rationales? This course examines these and other questions through political, historical, and media analysis. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 108D. POB: Disability (4)
Cultural and historical ways of defining and understanding disability relative to communication and assistive technologies, including the impact of digital technologies and the Americans with Disabilities Act. Course use of audiovisual texts and writings from fields including science and technology studies, and cultural studies. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 108G. POB: Gender and Biomedicine (4)
Historical and cultural aspects of media, information, imaging technology use in biomedical research, clinical care, health communication to constructions of gender and identity. We approach the subject through audiovisual texts and writings from fields including science and technology studies and cultural studies. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 109D. MC: Advertising and Society (4)
Advertising in historical and cross-cultural perspectives. Ideology and organization of the advertising industry; meaning of material goods; gifts in capitalist, socialist, and nonindustrial societies; natures of needs, desires, and whether advertising creates needs, desires; and approaches to decoding the advertising messages. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 109I. MC: History of Information (4)
Even though we consider ours to be the Information Age, information has a rich history that goes back to the invention of the printing press. This history focuses on the rise of mechanical and social technologies that fostered the spread of information. Topics will include media and networks (books, telegraphy, internet), collecting and storage (archives, libraries, digital repositories), elemental units (facts, bits, noise), and application and use (reading, messaging, algorithms). Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 109N. MC: American News Media (4)
History, politics, social organization, and ideology of the American news media. Surveys the development of the news media as an institution, from earliest newspapers to modern mass news media. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 109P. MC: Propaganda and Persuasion (4)
Propaganda, in political-economic, national settings; Soviet Union; Nazi Germany; US World War I and II. Propaganda films, contribution of filmmakers to propaganda campaign. Explore issues in propaganda; persuasive communication; political propaganda; persuasive advertising; public relations; practical, ethical perspectives. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 110G. LLC: Communication in Organizations (4)
Organizations are analyzed as historically evolving discursive systems of activity mediated by talk, text, and artifacts. The class covers sense making, coordinating, symbolizing, talking, negotiating, reading and writing, storytelling, joking, and visualizing in organizations. Exemplary case studies employing several complementary frameworks are used to analyze these communicative processes. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 110M. LLC: Communication and Community (4)
This course examines forms of communication that affect people’s everyday lives. Focusing on ways that ethnic communities transmit and acquire information and interact with mainstream institutions, we examine a variety of alternative local media, including murals, graffiti, newsletters, and community radio. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 110P. LLC: Language and Human Communication (4)
This course examines the interaction of language and culture in human communication. Beginning with language evolution, the course then discusses a broad range of human languages, including indigenous languages, sign languages, and hybrid languages spoken in urban centers. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 110T. LLC: Language, Thought, and Media (4)
This course examines the ways in which various communicative channels mediate human action and thought. A basic premise of the course is that human thought is shaped in important ways by the communicative devices used to communicate. There is a particular emphasis on how thought develops, both historically and in the individual. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 111A. CCP: Communication and Cultural Production: Introduction (4)
This course examines the products of culture industries (e.g., music, television, fashion, food, landscape, architectural design) to analyze, specifically, how culture is consumed and by whom. How are spectators hailed and audiences fostered and shaped? And what is the role of audiences in fostering and shaping cultural forms and products? Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 111B. CCP: Global Borders: Communication and Conflict (4)
Across the globe, geopolitical borders are charged sites of cross-cultural communication and conflict. While borders are commonly conceived as fixed physical demarcations, in this course we will examine borders as sites of exchange, as contested boundaries where diverse actors and practices converge and diverge, and as complex historical and socio-spatial formations that call into question presumed divisions between inside/outside, us/them, human/nonhuman, and technological/ecological. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 111C. CCP: Cities and Politics of Space (4)
This course offers an introduction to the production of urban space. Cities are produced by sociocultural shifts wrought by migration, technological changes, new forms of production, globalization, and climate change. How is the landscape or built environment of the city shaped by the combined and often contradictory forces of capital, expert knowledge, social movements, and urban dwellers? Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 111F. CCP: Folklore and Communication (4)
Folklore is characterized by particular styles, forms, and settings. Course introduces a range of folklore genres from different cultures, historical periods, oral narrative, material folk arts, dramas, rituals. Study of the relationship between expressive form and social context. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 111G. CCP: Popular Culture (4)
An overview of the historical development of popular culture from the early modern period to the present. Also, a review of major theories explaining how popular culture reflects and/or affects patterns of social behavior. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 111P. CCP: Performance and Cultural Studies (4)
Explores performance as a range of aesthetic conventions (theatre, film, performance art) and as a mode of experiencing and conveying cultural identity. Texts include critical writing from anthropology, psychology, linguistics, media studies, as well as film/video, play scripts, live performance. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 111T. CCP: Cultural Politics of Sport (4)
Examine sports as play, performance, competition, an arena where there are politics, culture, power, identity struggles. Establishing the social meanings of sport, we address ethics, race, class, nation, gender, body, science, technology, entertainment industries, commerce, spectatorship, consumption, amateurism, professionalism. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 112C. IM: The Idea of Childhood (4)
Our understanding of childhood as a stage of innocence is a modern idea. The idea of childhood has not been constant; different cultures, communities, and classes have shaped the integration of children according to their own standards. We examine the different ways that attitudes toward children have changed, how these attitudes have been connected to an understanding of the human being, and how the desires of society and parents are manifested in what they think the child should be. Prerequisites: COMM 10 or HDP 1.

COMM 112G. IM: Language and Globalization (4)
The interaction of language and culture in human communication. New and old languages, standard and dialect, dominant and endangered are the special focus. Selected languages as examples of how languages exist in contemporary contexts. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 113T. Intermediate Topics in Communication (4)
Specialized study of communication topics, to be determined by the instructor, for any given quarter. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 114A. CSI: Human Rights, Communication, and Contemporary Global Justice (4)
How should we as global citizens respond to the horrifying human rights abuses that saturate news headlines and social media posts? How do communication practices, the right to information, freedom of expression, and media and journalists function within the contemporary human rights regime? Examine human rights protections—against genocide, torture, enslavement, political persecution, gender violence, and climate displacement—and their violation through case studies from 1945 to the present.

COMM 114B. CSI: Communication and Social Institutions: Human Rights Advocacy: Journalists, Activists and Scholars at Risk (4)
How should we respond to the continued violation of human rights to exercise freedom of expression and to engage in open inquiry and social justice actions without fear of persecution? Students will gain a practical understanding of the mechanisms through which different actors fight for human rights by researching and/or participating in an international human rights advocacy campaign on behalf of a specific journalist, activist, or scholar at risk of expulsion, imprisonment, or death.

COMM 114C. CSI: On Constitutions (4)
Consider “constitutions” as meaning-making, world-building mechanisms and practices. Explore how constitutions work: as interpretive instruments designed to frame, organize, guide human thought, action, and systems (according to certain rules or principles often represented as divine in origin and universal in effect) and; as ongoing, dynamic interpretative processes that nevertheless congeal in objects, bodies, and social arrangements and are thus considered binding or unalterable. Prerequisites: COMM 10 or COGN 20.

COMM 114D. CSI: New Media, Youth, and Democracy (4)
Does “new media” deliver on its promise to expand access to public participation? We will analyze, produce, and counter narratives about media, youth, and democracy. The course should interest students who care about politics, human development, community engagement, or human computer interaction. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 114E. CSI: Gender, Labor, and Culture in the Global Economy (4)
This course introduces students to different theories of globalization and of gender. Against this theoretical background, students critically examine the gendered (and racialized) nature of labor in the production of material, social, and cultural goods in the global economy. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 114F. CSI: Law, Communication, and Freedom of Expression (4)
Examination of the legal framework of freedom of expression in the United States. Covers fundamentals of First Amendment law studying key cases in historical content. Prior restraint, incitement, obscenity, libel, fighting words, public forum, campaign finance, commercial speech, and hate speech are covered. Prerequisites: COMM 10 or DOC 2 or POLI 40.

COMM 114G. CSI: Gender and Science (4)
This course will focus on arguments about cognitive differences between men and women in science. We will review current arguments about essential differences, historical beliefs about gender attributes and cognitive ability, and gender socialization into patterns of learning in school. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 114I. CSI: Media Technologies and Social Movements (4)
Course explores the roles of media technologies in activist campaigns, social movements. Blending theory, historical case studies, and project-based group work, students will investigate possibilities and limitations of attempts to enroll new and old media technologies in collective efforts to make social change. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 114J. CSI: Food Justice (4)
Examine food justice from multiple analytical and theoretical perspectives: race, class, diversity, equity, legal-institutional, business, ethical, ecological, scientific, cultural, and socio-technical. Compare political strategies of food justice organizations/movements aimed at creating healthy and sustainable food systems locally and globally. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 114K. CSI: Community Fieldwork (2)
Specialized study in community-based and/or participatory design research with topics to be determined by the instructor, for any given quarter. Students who choose the option to do fieldwork for any given course, need to register for COMM 114K. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: none.

COMM 114M CSI: Communication and the Law (4)
Using classic and modern texts, the course explores fundamental questions of law and political theory: What are rights and where do they come from? What is the balance between freedom and equality, between individual and common goods? These theoretical explorations are then oriented to specifically communication concerns: What is the relationship between privacy and personhood? Between free speech and democracy? Between intellectual property and efficient markets? Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 114N. CSI: Communication and the Law: The Body in Law (4)
This course concentrates on one area of law specific to the concerns of communication: the relationship between privacy, personhood, and bodily autonomy. Using a combination of legal texts, court cases, and theoretical literature, we will consider the changing nature of each dimension of this relationship as the courts have been called upon to adjudicate conflicting claims and visions in matters of reproduction, sexual identity, genetic engineering, and the commodification of body parts. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 114P. CSI: Public History and Museum Studies (4)
This course will explore the role that “public history”—history as created for general audiences—plays in communicating cultural and national identities by examining museum exhibitions, their controversies, and how material objects mediate interpretations of the past. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 114T. CSI: Science Communication (4)
Examine science communication as a profession and unique form of storytelling. Identify who does science communication, how, why, and with what impacts. Highlight science communication’s role in democracy, power, public reason, technological trajectories, the sustainability transition, and shifting university-community relations. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 114W. CSI: Global Health Communication (4)
Public health campaigns attempt to change behavior, slow the spread of disease, and improve the health of a population. This course takes a critical social science perspective on the production, dissemination, and impacts (intended and otherwise) of public health communication, including questions of coercion, autonomy, and perceptions of collective health and well-being. Prerequisites: COMM 10 or GLBH 20.

COMM 115. Communication and the Senses (4)
While we often assume that communication is something that happens only with our eyes and/or ears, every act of communication is multisensory, often involving sight and sound but also smell, touch, and taste. In this course, students will learn how to pay attention to and engage with the “other” senses beyond the visual and auditory. Interdisciplinary scholarship and empirical activities help students build a vocabulary for understanding the complexities of multisensory communication. Prerequisites: COMM 10.

COMM 120I. AMP: Social Issues in Media Production (4)
Analyze forms of social issue media production, photography, audio/radio, arts, crafts, web, print zines, political documentary. Students work with several forms of media making: video, audio, web design, and a project in their chosen format. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and two of COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 120M. AMP: Media Stereotypes (4)
An examination of how the media present society’s members and activities in stereotypical formats. Reasons for and consequences of this presentation are examined. Student responsibilities will be (a) participation in measurement and analysis of stereotype presentations. (b) investigating techniques for assessing both cognitive and behavioral effects of such scripted presentations on the users of media. Students will not receive credit for COMT 105 and COMM 120M. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and two of COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 120N. AMP: News Media Workshop (4)
Designed for students working in student news organizations or off-campus internships or jobs in news, public relations, or public information. A workshop in news writing and news analysis. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and two from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 120P. AMP: Digital Media in Education (4)
This course develops critical understanding of educational uses of digital media through firsthand experience in public educational settings, and readings/discussions of challenges, benefits, and pitfalls of educational applications of media technology. Three hours/week of fieldwork required. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and two from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 120W. AMP: Writing for Digital Media (4)
Practice, history, and theory of writing for digital media. Text combines with images, sounds, movement, and interaction. New network technologies (email, blogs, wikis, and virtual worlds) create new audience relationships. Computational processes enable texts that are dynamically configured and more. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and two from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 124A. Critical Design Practice/Advanced Studio (4)
Hands-on course introduces design as political activity. How will differently designed objects, environments perpetuate, interrupt status quo. Examine design, architecture, media activism, workday life. Examine ambiguous problems, take and give feedback, create prototypes to engage communities, broader publics. Students see design as part of longer-term social transformations. Prerequisites: COMM 10 or COGS 1 or ESYS 10 or POLI 10 or POLI 10D or USP 1.

COMM 124B. Critical Design Practice/Topic Studio (4)
Course builds on understanding design as political activity. Group work to design quarter-long projects that explore political role of design, include design in built environments, organizations, media technologies. Deepened capacities to design in public, for publics, with publics. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: COMM 124A.

COMM 126. Children and Media (4)
A course that analyzes the influence of media on children’s behavior and thought processes. The course takes a historical perspective, beginning with children’s print literature, encompassing movies, music, television, and computers. Students will study specific examples of media products intended for children and apply various analytic techniques, including content analysis and experimentation to these materials. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 127. Problem of Voice (4)
This course will explore the problem of self-expression for members of various ethnic and cultural groups. Of special interest is how writers find ways of describing themselves in the face of others’ sometimes overwhelming predilection to describe them. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 129. Race, Nation, and Violence in Multicultural California (4)
How does media representation of race, nation, and violence work? Taking multicultural California as our site, we will explore how social power is embedded in a variety of visual texts, and how media not only represents but also reproduces conflict. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 131. Communication, Dissent, and the Formation of Social Movements (4)
Emergence of dissent in different societies, and relationship of dissent to movements of protest and social change. Movements studied include media concentration, antiwar, antiglobalization, death penalty, national liberation, and labor. Survey of dissenting voices seeking to explain the relationship of ideas to collective action and outcomes. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 132. Advanced Topics in Communication, Politics, and Society (4)
Specialized study of communication, politics, and society with topics to be determined by the instructor for any given quarter. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 133. Television and Citizenship (4)
Television is a contested site for negotiating the rationales of inclusion and exclusion associated with citizenship and national belonging. Historical and contemporary case studies within international comparative contexts consider regulation, civil rights, cultural difference, social movements, new technologies, and globalization. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 134. Media Audiences (4)
Examines the complex relationship between mass media and the consumers and viewers they target. This course covers theories about audiences, reading practices of audiences, the economics of audiences, and the role of audiences in the digital era. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 135. Contemporary Minority Media Makers and the Festival Experience (4)
This advanced course examines, analyzes, and discusses media works by contemporary Asian American, Native American, African American, and Latina/o American filmmakers. The course does not offer a historical survey of films by minority makers but rather will operate on themes such as cultural identity, urbanization, personal relationships, gender relations, cultural retentions, and music. The course will require students to attend some off-campus screenings, especially those at area film festivals. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 136. Transmedia (4)
Transmedia is a mode of production in which a text or story unfolds across multiple media platforms. Exploring all the facets of this widespread phenomenon—historical, aesthetic, industrial, theoretical, and practical. This course explores and critically analyzes the art and economics of contemporary transmedia. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 137. Black Women Filmmakers (4)
Students examine film and video media produced by black women filmmakers worldwide. This course will use readings from the writings of the filmmakers themselves as well as from film studies, women’s studies, literature, sociology, and history. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 138. Black Women, Feminism, and Media (4)
This course examines the challenges that arise in using feminist theory to understand black women’s experience in Africa and the United States. It also looks at the mass media and popular culture as arenas of black feminist struggle. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 139. Examining Marvel’s Black Panther (4)
This course looks at the politics of the cinema industry and the development and reception of Marvel’s blockbuster film, Black Panther. We read articles, books, and graphic novels connected to the film examining its reception, impact, and response. We dive deeper into the issues around cinematic representations of Black people with a focus on depictions of African cultures in cinema. We also consider the history and contributions of the original Black Panthers of the 1960s to worldwide cultures. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 140. Cinema in Latin America (4)
Analysis of the changing content and sociopolitical role in Latin America of contemporary media, including the “new cinema” movement, recent developments in film, and popular television programming, including the telenovela. Examples drawn from Mexico, Brazil, Cuba, and other countries. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 142. Film Authorship (4)
This course examines film authorship by focusing on two filmmakers and exploring the many ways that films are authored and produce meaning. Students learn how to analyze a film’s production, collaboration, representation, reception, and industrial context, in order to explore broader themes and social issues such as race, class, gender, violence, and authorial responsibility. Film authors may include Spike Lee, Kathryn Bigelow, Bong Joon-ho, or Alfonso Cuarón. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 143. Science Fiction (4)
Focuses on science fiction’s critical investigation of history, identity, and society across a range of media forms, including film, television, and literature. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 144. American Television in the 1970s (4)
Course will explore the politics and culture of the 1970s through the lens of network television programming and the decade’s most provocative sitcoms, dramas, variety shows, and news features. Students will analyze television episodes and read relevant media studies scholarship. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 145. History, Memory, and Popular Culture (4)
What role does popular culture play in shaping and creating our shared memory of the past? The course examines diverse sources such as school textbooks, monuments, holidays and commemorations, museums, films, music, and tourist attractions. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and two from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 146. Advanced Topics in Cultural Production (4)
Specialized advanced study in cultural production with topics to be determined by the instructor for any given quarter. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 151. The Information Age: Fact and Fiction (4)
Analysis of the forces propelling the Information Age. An examination of the differential benefits and costs, and a discussion of the presentation in the general media of the Information Age. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 153. Architecture as Communication (4)
This course examines how buildings, cities, towns, gardens, neighborhoods, roads, bridges, and other bits of infrastructure communicate. We consider both the materiality and language like properties of physical things in order to understand how built environments are represented, experienced, and remembered. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 155. Latinx Space, Place, and Culture (4)
Develop a critical understanding of the history, politics, and poetics of the Latino barrio as a distinct urban form. Course covers key concepts such as the production of space, landscapes of power, spatial apartheid, everyday urbanism, urban renewal, and gentrification. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 156. Media and Conflict Environment: Textual and Visual Representations (4)
Environments of conflict, including war, generate enormous amounts of passion as well as controversy. This course examines how various forms of media represent violent conflicts, and the controversies that follow from these media representations. The aim of the course is to explore how the culture, political economy, and primary actors of media environments confront the challenge of covering various types of conflicts and the types of stories and images that emerge in the process. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 158. Representations of the Israeli/Palestinian Conflict (4)
The conflict between the state of Israel and the group of people known as Palestinians is arguably the most intractable conflict in the world today. This course is a critical engagement with debates about this conflict, and the different representations of these debates. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 159. Tourism, Power, and Place (4)
Explores tourism encounters around the world to question the discourses, imaginaries, and social practices involved in the construction, consumption, and reproduction of stereotypical representations of otherness (place, nature, culture, bodies). Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 160. Political Economy and International Communication (4)
The character and forms of international communications. Emerging structures of international communications. The United States as the foremost international communicator. Differential impacts of the free flow of information and the unequal roles and needs of developed and developing economies in international communications. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 162. Advanced Studies in Cultural Industries (4)
We examine how people interact with products of popular culture, production of cultural goods by looking at conditions in cultural industries. We examine film, music, publishing, focusing on how production is organized, what kind of working conditions arise, how products are distributed. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 163. Concepts of Freedom (4)
This course examines some of the changing cultural, social, technological, and political meanings; practices; and aspirations that together constitute what is and has been called freedom. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 164. Behind the Internet: Invisible Geographies of Power and Inequality (4)
This course aims to unveil the vast and largely hidden infrastructures silently shaping how digital communication take place in contemporary societies as well as the visible and invisible geographic of power and inequality these infrastructures are helping to create. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 166. Surveillance, Media, and the Risk Society (4)
Contributions of the field of communication to the study of surveillance and risk. Critical and legal perspectives on consumer research, copyright enforcement, the surveillance capacity of Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs), closed-circuit television, interactive media, and the “rhetorics of surveillance” in television and film. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 168. Bilingual Communication (4)
This course is designed to introduce students to multiple settings where bilingualism is the mode of communication. Examination of how such settings are socially constructed and culturally based. Language policy, bilingual education, and linguistic minorities, as well as field activities included. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 170. Biography and Life Stories (4)
Course examines several different ways of telling stories as a form of communication: our own life and about the lives of others. There are also the occasions that the life stories of ordinary people are told at and celebrated, for example, funerals, Festschrifts, retirement dinners, fiftieth-anniversary parties, and retrospective art shows. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 171. Environmental Communication (4)
Survey of the communication practices found in environment controversies. The sociological aspects of environmental issues will provide background for the investigation of environmental disputes in particular contested areas, such as scientific institutions, communities, workplaces, governments, popular culture, and the media. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 172. Advanced Topics in Mediation and Interaction (4)
Specialized advanced study in mediation and interaction with topics to be determined by the instructor for any given quarter. May be taken three times for credit. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 173. Interaction with Technology (4)
In this class we will look closely at the everyday ways in which we interact with technology to discuss sociocultural character of objects, built environments; situated, distributed, and embodied character of knowledges; use of multimodal semiotic resources, talk, gesture, body orientation, and gaze in interaction with technology. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C. 

COMM 174. Communication and Social Machines (4)
An examination of the questions that developments in robotics pose to the scholars of communication: How do we communicate when our interlocutors are nonhumans? How do we study objects that are claimed to be endowed with social and affective character? Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 175. Cultures of Consumption (4)
This course examines the cultural politics of consumption across time and cultures through several concepts: commodity fetishism; conspicuous consumption; taste; class; and identity formation; consumption’s psychological, phenomenological, and poetic dimensions; and contemporary manifestations of globalization and consumer activism. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 176. Communication and Religion (4)
The secularization thesis—that as society becomes more modern and standards of living rise, the importance of religion will diminish and be confined to the private sphere—may be wrong. We address religion, communication, culture, and politics in the United States. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 177. Culture, Domination, and Resistance (4)
Explores theories and narratives of cultural power, contemporary practices of resistance. Texts from a wide range of disciplines consider how domination is enacted, enforced, and what modes of resistance are employed to contend with uses and abuses of political power. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 178. Communication and Nonhuman Animals (4)
The course increases our awareness of communicative repertoires in nonhuman animals. Noticing their richness allows us to engage topics of iconicity and indexicality, body and movement, feeling and sensation, space and environment, and aspects of voice that do not stand for established units of meaning. We will discuss how this turning to nonhuman communication illuminates human communication and how cross-species communication takes place. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 180. Advanced Studies in Communication Theory (4)
How are messages created, transmitted, and received? What is the relationship between thinking and communicating? How are linguistic processes embedded in sociocultural practices? Course discusses classic texts in the field of communication theory stemming from linguistics, semiotics, philosophy of language, literary theory. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 181. Citizen Consumers (4)
This course considers the idea of the citizen-consumer that organizes much of contemporary urban planning and processes of identity, class, race, and gender formation in cities globally. Focusing on contemporary service oriented economies, we will critically explore how consumption spaces, such as shopping malls, theme parks, plazas, markets, parks, beaches, and tourist resorts, are critical nodes to understand neoliberal patterns of land transformation, labor exploitation, and social change. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 182. Education and Global Citizenship (4)
Concepts, possibilities, and dilemmas inherent in the notion of global citizenship. Formulate goals and instructional strategies for global education, expected competence of individuals within society. Examine roles that communication and curriculum play in the formation of identity, language use, and civic responsibility of global citizens. Prerequisites: COMM 10, COMM 100A, 100B, and 100C.

COMM 183. Global Economy and Consumer Culture (4)
This course critically examines social and economic forces that shape the making of this new global consumer culture by following the flows of consumption and production between the developed and developing worlds in the 1990s. We will consider how consumers, workers, and citizens participate in a new globalized consumer culture that challenges older distinctions between the First and the Third World. In this course, we will focus on the flows between the United States, Asia, and Latin America. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 184. Global Nature/Global Culture (4)
Considers globalization’s impact on concepts of nature in and through media texts, information systems, circulation of consumer goods and services, the emergence of global brands, science, health initiatives, environmental media activism, technology transfer in the twentieth and early twenty-first centuries. Prerequisites: COMM 10 and one from COMM 100A, 100B, 100C.

COMM 194. Research Seminar in Washington, D.C. (4)
(Same as POLI 194, USP 194, HITO 193, SOCI 194, and COGS 194) Course attached to six-unit internship taken by students participating in the UCDC program. Involves weekly seminar meetings with faculty and teaching assistants and a substantial research paper. Prerequisites: participation in UCDC program.

COMM 196A. Honors Seminar in Communication I: Methods (4)
Preparation of an honors thesis, which can be either a research paper or a media production project. Open to students who have been admitted to the honors program. Grades will be awarded upon completion of the two-quarter sequence. Prerequisites: admission to the departmental honors program.

COMM 196B. Honors Seminar in Communication II: Research (4)
Preparation of an honors thesis, which can be either a research paper or a media production project. Open to students who have been admitted to the honors program. Grades will be awarded upon completion of the two-quarter sequence. Prerequisites: minimum grade of B+ in COMM 196A.

COMM 198. Directed Group Study in Communication (4)
Directed group study on a topic or in a field not included in the regular curriculum by special arrangement with a faculty member. May be taken three times for credit. Prerequisites: consent of instructor. (P/NP grades only.)

COMM 199. Independent Study in Communication (4)
Independent study and research under the direction of a member of the faculty. May be taken three times for credit. Prerequisites: consent of instructor. (P/NP grades only.)

COMM 199H. Honors Project Completion in Communication (4)
Under the guidance of both Honors Seminar director and faculty mentor, students will complete their thesis or media production and prepare for a presentation of their finished product at a public event sponsored by the department. Prerequisites: COMM 196A-B and consent of instructor. (P/NP grades only.)

CSS 1. Introductory Programming for Computational Social Science (4)
This course develops computational thinking practices and skills critical for defining, describing, and analyzing social science problems using a computational approach. Students will learn to program in Python in the context of computational social science problems.

CSS 2. Data and Model Programming for Computational Social Science (4)
This course explores the use of computational methods across the social sciences. Topics include thinking like a computational social scientist; research design for big data; legal and ethical dimensions of computational social science (CSS). Students will implement demonstrations of these methods in Python. Prerequisites: CSS 1 and choose one of the following courses: COGS 14B, MATH 11, MGT 3, POLI 30, POLI 30D, PSYC 60.

CSS 100. Advanced Programming for Computational Social Science (4)
This course develops advanced computational problem-solving skills including common algorithms, data structures, and advanced tool and library options. The class provides further development in Python. Prerequisites: CSS 2.

CCE 1. Critical Approaches in Community Practice (4)
Introduces ethical partnership across complex social, historical, and political positions. The course addresses contested framings of community and participation through practical examples, theoretical conceptions, and empirical studies. Students will give close attention to shared circumstance and negotiation of power relations. Must be taken for a letter grade to count toward Eighth College general-education requirements. Prerequisites: Eighth College students only; completion of UC Entry Level Writing Requirement.

CGS 2A. Introduction to Critical Gender Studies: Key Terms and Concepts (4)
This course will be a general introduction to the key terms, issues, and concepts in the fields of gender and sexuality studies.

CGS 2B. Introduction to Critical Gender Studies: Social Formations (4)
An introduction to the social relations of power that are shaped by and that shape gender and sexuality. It will build more on the basic concepts and skills introduced in CGS 2A.

CGS 87. Critical Gender Studies First-year Seminar (1)
The First-year Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year seminars can be offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students.

CGS 100A. Conceptualizing Gender: Theoretical Approaches (4)
This course explores the significance of gender as a category of analysis by examining diverse theoretical frameworks from the field of critical gender studies. Particular attention is given to gender in relation to race, class, sexuality, nation, (dis)ability, and religion. Students will not receive credit for both CGS 100 and 100A. Prerequisites: CGS 2A-B or at least one CGS upper-division course.

CGS 100B. Conceptualizing Gender: Methods and Methodologies (4)
Introduction to interdisciplinary research methodologies used in critical gender studies. Students will learn to identify and utilize humanities, social science, and natural science methods for studying gender and sexuality, and to evaluate how knowledge about gender and sexuality is produced. Prerequisites: CGS 2A-B or at least one CGS upper-division course.

CGS 101. Gender and Globalization (4)
This course explores effects of globalization on transnational relations of gender and sexuality. Topics include the division of labor, politics of production and consumption, constructions of gender and sexuality within global grassroots movements, and the migration of people, capital, and culture. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

CGS 105. Queer Theory (4)
Examines the different methodologies and disciplinary histories that together constitute the interdisciplinary project called queer studies. Of particular interest will be how these different methodologies and history construe and construct the relations between gender, race, class, and nation. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

CGS 106. Gender and the Law (4)
Explores the legal treatment of discrimination on the basis of gender, including equal protection doctrine and some statutory law such as Title VII. Topics include the meaning of gender equality in such areas as single-sex education, military service, sexual harassment, discrimination on the basis of pregnancy, and other current issues.

CGS 108. Gender, Race, and Artificial Intelligence (4)
(Cross-listed with LTCS 108.) This course explores the idea of artificial intelligence in both art and science, its relation to the quest to identify what makes us human, and the role gender and race have played in both. Students may not receive credit for CGS 108 and LTCS 108.

CGS 109. Sexual Violence (4)
This course examines how sexual violence is experienced in relation to/with gender, racialization, sexuality, and class. It considers reporting structures and asks who is heard when sexual violence is named and how so many are not heard. It also explores movements working to interrupt sexual violence.

CGS 110. Intersectional Struggles for Environmental Justice (4)
Colonial and capitalist exploitation has left a trail of environmental destruction and devastated communities stretching across the globe. This course will apply an intersectional lens to analyzing racialized, gendered extractivist wastelands, environmental injustices, and the movements struggling for alternate futures.

CGS 111. Gender and the Body (4)
Various approaches to the study of gendered bodies. Possible topics to include masculinities/femininities; lifecycles; biology, culture, and identity; medical discourses; and health issues. May be taken for credit three times when topics vary. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

CGS 112. Sexuality and Nation (4)
(Cross-listed with ETHN 127.) This course explores the nexus of sex, race, ethnicity, gender, and nation and considers their influence on identity, sexuality, migration movement and borders, and other social, cultural, and political issues that these constructs affect. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

CGS 113. Gender and Sexuality in the Arts (4)
Examines gender and sexuality in artistic practices: music, theatre, dance, performance, visual arts, and new media. Topics may include study of specific artists, historical moments, genres, cross-cultural analyses, and multiculturalism. May be taken three times when topics vary. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

CGS 114. Gender, Race, Ethnicity, and Class (4)
(Cross-listed with ETHN 183.) Gender is often neglected in studies of ethnic/racial politics. This course explores the relationship of race, ethnicity, class, and gender by examining the participation of working-class women of color in community politics and how they challenge mainstream political theory.

CGS 116. Feminist Social Movements (4)
This course will examine past and present feminist social movements and their implications and political impact in the contemporary moment. What are the basic dynamics of social movements? What future political forms and practices may be enabled by past and present movements? The #MeToo movement and other social movements will be covered.

CGS 117. Transgenderisms (4)
(Cross-listed with ANSC 117.) This course contrasts mainstream Anglo-American conceptualizations of transgenderism with ethnographic accounts of the experiences and practices of gender expansive people of color (African, Native, Asian/Pacific Islander, and Latinx Americans) in the United States and abroad. It will question the idea of transgenderism as a crossing from one gender to another one, the distinction between gender identity and sexuality, and the analytic of intersectionality. Students will not receive credit for both CGS 117 and ANSC 117.

CGS 118. Gender and Incarceration (4)
(Cross-listed with ANSC 186.) This course investigates the ways in which forces of racism, gendered violence, and state control intersect in the penal system. The prison-industrial complex is analyzed as a site where certain types of gendered and racialized bodies are incapacitated, neglected, or made to die. Students may not receive credit for CGS 118 and ANSC 186.

CGS 119. Asian American Film, Video, and New Media: The Politics of Pleasure (4)
(Cross-listed with LTCS 119.) The course explores the politics of pleasure in relation to the production, reception, and performance of Asian American identities in the mass media of film, video, and the internet. The course considers how the “deviant” sexuality of Asian Americans (e.g., hypersexual women and emasculated men) does more than uniformly harm and subjugate Asian American subjects. The texts explored alternate between those produced by majoritarian culture and the interventions made by Asian American filmmakers. Students may not receive credit for LTCS 119 and CGS 119.

CGS 120. Capitalism and Gender (4)
(Cross-listed with ANSC 180.) Drawing insight from anticolonial and queer of color critique, this course critically examines the demands capitalism makes on us to perform gender, and how that relates to processes of exploitation and racialization. We will explore alternatives and develop strategies for navigating jobs in this system. Students may receive credit for one of the following: CGS 120, CGS 180, and ANSC 180.

CGS 121. Selected Topics in Critical Gender Studies (4)
An interdisciplinary course focusing on one of a variety of topics in gender studies, such as gender and science, the body, reproductive technologies, and public policy. May be taken for credit three times when topics vary. Prerequisites: CGS 2A-B, at least one CGS upper-division course, or permission of the instructor.

CGS 122. Advanced Topics in Comparative Perspectives (4)
Focuses on the relationship between gender and culture from a multiplicity of perspectives. Possible topics could include gender and ethnicity, gender across class, and other topics to be examined in a cross-cultural framework. May be taken for credit two times when topics vary. Prerequisites: CGS 2A-B, at least one CGS upper-division course, or permission of the instructor.

CGS 123. Gender and Reproductive Politics (4)
Legal treatment of gender, reproductive rights, and the family, particularly as evolving law, primarily in the U.S., has created conflicting rights, roles, and responsibilities. Topics include abortion, fetal rights, surrogacy, marriage, and child custody issues. Students will not receive credit for both CGS 107 and 123. Prerequisites: CGS 2A-B, at least one CGS upper-division course, or permission of the instructor.

CGS 124. Girls and Sexuality (4)
Explores how girls’ sexualities are shaped by gender, race, class, educational, medical, and penal institutions, and sexual norms. Engages with interdisciplinary scholarship that examines how and why girls and sexuality is such a volatile subject of public debate, and the manner in which girls’ sexualities are represented in various media. Students will not receive credit for both CGS 116 and 124. Prerequisites: CGS 2A-B, at least one CGS upper-division course, or permission of the instructor.

CGS 125. Women of Color Writers (4)
For women of color, writing has been more than just artistic expression. Women of color have also used the written word to challenge dominant ideas of race, gender, desire, power, violence, and intimacy, and to construct new ways of knowing, writing, and being. This course examines writing by women of color to understand how literary texts can shape and reflect social and political contexts. Prerequisites: CGS 2A or CGS 2B or at least one CGS upper-division course.

CGS 126. Muslims on Gender and Sexuality (4)
This course will critically examine selected feminist, queer, and trans activist and scholarly productions of Muslim women and nonbinary people who are engaging with urgent questions about gender and sexuality in relation to Islam and Muslimness in the Islamicate and diasporas. It will encourage students to explore questions of gender and queerness at the Muslim sacred and seemingly secular sites of the Qur’an, law, borders, immigration, home, labor, desire, fashion, and activism. Prerequisites: CGS 2A or 2B or at least one CGS upper-division course.

CGS 127. Feminist Border Studies (4)
This course investigates how borders are produced, policed, and maintained, centering gender and sexuality, embodiment, and racialization as key analytic lenses. Prerequisites: CGS 2A or 2B or at least one CGS upper-division course.

CGS 128. Transnational Feminisms (4)
This course will examine key works in transnational feminist theory. Students will engage with transnational and third world feminisms to trace and ask questions of Eurocentrism, global capitalism, gendered and racialized forms of labor exploitation, and practices of antiracist feminist solidarity. Prerequisites: CGS 2A or 2B or at least one CGS upper-division course.

CGS 130. Queer Performativity (4)
An advanced introduction to the interdisciplinary field of performance studies with a focus on queer expression. Examines queer theory, cultural production, and social movements, drawing from scholarship on performativity that explores how art, writing, and everyday actions make meaning in the world. Prerequisites: CGS 2A or 2B or at least one CGS upper-division course.

CGS 135. Feminist Science and Technology Studies (4)
Interweaving insights from history and philosophy of science, sociology of scientific institutions and knowledge, and anthropology, science studies views sciences and technologies as crucially enmeshed in human culture and politics. This course explores modern western and/or American science with a particular focus on the dynamics of race, ethnicity, gender, colonialism, and their intersections in scientific knowledge production and technological development. Prerequisites: CGS 2A or 2B or at least one CGS upper-division course.

CGS 137. Latina Issues and Cultural Production (4)
(Cross-listed with ETHN 137.) This course will focus on the intersection of labor, class, race, ethnicity, gender, sexuality, and immigration in Latina cultural production. Examined from a socioeconomic, feminist, and cultural perspective, class readings will allow for historically grounded analyses of these issues. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: CGS 2A-B, ETHN 1, 2, or 3, at least one CGS or ETHN upper-division course, or permission of the instructor. Students may receive a combined total of twelve units for CGS 137 and ETHN 137.

CGS 147. Black Feminisms, Past and Present (4)
(Cross-listed with ETHN 147.) An advanced introduction to historical and contemporary black feminisms in the United States and transnationally. Students will explore the theory and practice of black feminists/womanists and analyze the significance of black feminism to contemporary understandings of race, class, gender, and sexuality. Students may not receive credit for CGS 147 and ETHN 147. Prerequisites: CGS 2A-B, ETHN 1, 2, 3, at least one CGS or ETHN upper-division course, or permission of the instructor.

CGS 150. Visuality, Sexuality, and Race (4)
(Cross-listed with ETHN 150.) Examines the role of the visual in power relations; the production of what we see regarding race and sexuality; the interconnected history of the caste system, plantation slavery, visuality and contemporary society; decolonial and queer counternarratives to visuality. Students may not receive credit for CGS 150 and ETHN 150. Prerequisites: CGS 2A-B, ETHN 1, 2, 3, at least one CGS or ETHN upper-division course, or permission of the instructor.

CGS 165. Gender and Sexuality in African American Communities (4)
(Cross-listed with ETHN 165.) This course will investigate the changing constructions of sexuality, gender, and sexuality in African American communities defined by historical period, region, and class. Topics will include the sexual division of labor, myths of black sexuality, the rise of black feminism, black masculinity, and queer politics. Students may not receive credit for CGS 165 and ETHN 165. Prerequisites: CGS 2A-B, ETHN 1, 2, 3, at least one CGS or ETHN upper-division course, or permission of the instructor.

CGS 187. Latinx Sexualities (4)
(Cross-listed with ETHN 187.) The construction and articulation of Latinx sexualities will be explored in this course through interdisciplinary and comparative perspectives. We will discuss how immigration, class, and norms of ethnicity, race, and gender determine the construction, expression, and reframing of Latinx sexualities. Students will not receive credit for both CGS 115 and 187. Prerequisites: CGS 2A-B, ETHN 1, 2, 3, at least one CGS or ETHN upper-division course, or permission of the instructor.

CGS 190. Honors Seminar (4)
Interdisciplinary readings in feminist theory and research methodology to prepare students for writing an honors thesis. Open to critical gender studies majors who have been admitted to Critical Gender Studies Honors Program. May be applied toward primary concentration in critical gender studies major. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and department preauthorization required.

CGS 196A. Critical Gender Studies Honors Research (4)
A program of independent study providing candidates for critical gender studies honors to develop, in consultation with an adviser, a preliminary proposal for the honors thesis. An IP grade will be awarded at the end of this quarter. A final grade for both quarters will be given upon completion of Critical Gender Studies 196B. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and department preauthorization required.

CGS 196B. Honors Thesis in Critical Gender Studies (4)
Honors thesis research and writing for students who have completed Critical Gender Studies 190 and 196A. A letter grade for both Critical Gender Studies 196A and 196B will be given at the completion of this quarter. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and department preauthorization required.

CGS 198. Directed Group Study in Critical Gender Studies (2–4)
Directed group study on a topic not generally included in the critical gender studies curriculum. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and director of Critical Gender Studies Program and department stamp required.

CGS 199. Independent Study in Critical Gender Studies (2–4)
Tutorial; independent study on a topic not generally included in the curriculum. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and director of Critical Gender Studies Program and department stamp required.

CAT 1. Culture, Art, and Technology 1 (4)
Lower-division composition course teaching critical reading and drafting by examining how culture, art, and technology have intersected in the past. Prerequisites: Sixth College students only; completion of UC Entry Level Writing Requirement.

CAT 2. Culture, Art, and Technology 2 (6)
Lower-division writing-intensive course foregrounding argumentation, revision, and writing as process by examining case studies of culture, art, and technology interacting in the present moment. Prerequisites: Sixth College students only; CAT 1.

CAT 3. Culture, Art, and Technology 3 (6)
Lower-division writing- and research-intensive course focusing on collaboration, research, and art-making by speculating on how the relationships between culture, art, and technology will be transformed in the future. Prerequisites: Sixth College students only; CAT 2.

CAT 24. Introduction to Special Projects/Topics (2 or 4)
Lower-division students are introduced to projects/topics exploring the interplay of culture, art, and technology. Topics and projects will vary. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: department authorization required.

CAT 75. Experience Art!—Sixth College Seminar Series (1)
Seminars are hands-on arts experiences (performances, exhibits, site visits, etc.). Students and faculty attend events together and have discussions before or after, often with guest speakers such as the artists, curators, and/or faculty/graduate students from UC San Diego arts departments. Successful completion of this seminar series satisfies one unit of art making for the Sixth College general education requirements. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: Sixth College students only.

CAT 87. First-year Student Seminar in Culture, Art, and Technology (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students with preference given to entering first-year students. May be taken for credit four times. Prerequisites: none.

CAT 90. Introduction to Experiential Learning Seminar (1)
A lower-division seminar to introduce new Sixth College students to experiential learning in a small-group setting. It explores relevant practices in a variety of disciplines and avenues for immersive learning in areas such as community engagement, fieldwork, research, internship, and study abroad. Students will learn to access experiential learning resources and to identify and approach prospective mentors. Recommended preparation for Sixth College’s practicum requirement. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: Sixth College students only; department authorization required.

CAT 98. Culture, Art, and Technology Lower-Division Group Study (2 or 4)
Course designated for lower-division Sixth College students to have the opportunity to work together as a group or team on a project supervised by a faculty member in a specific department, not included in a regular curriculum, where group emphasis would be more beneficial and constructive then individual special studies. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: lower-division standing; cumulative GPA of 3.0.

CAT 124. Sixth College Practicum (4)
Students initiate, plan, and carry out community-based and/or research-based projects that connect classroom-based experiences and knowledge to the outlying community, and that explicitly explore the interplay of culture, art, and technology. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; department authorization required.

CAT 124GS. Sixth College Practicum Global Seminar (4)
This course will have students initiate, plan, and carry out research-based and/or community-based projects. These projects will connect classroom-based experiences and knowledge to the outlying community, and explicitly explore the interplay of culture, art, and technology. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; department authorization required.

CAT 124RS. Sixth College Practicum Online Global Seminar (4)
Students initiate, plan, and carry out research-based and/or community-based projects that connect classroom-based experiences and knowledge to the outlying community, and that explicitly explore the interplay of culture, art, and technology. This course is a distance education course. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; department authorization required.

CAT 125. Public Rhetoric and Practical Communication (4)
Upper-division composition course in public rhetoric and practical communication, including oral presentation, writing in print formats, and digital content creation. This course also focuses on how writing can support and extend experiential learning before, during, or after students complete their practicum. Completion of lower-division writing sequence through taking CAT 1, CAT 2, and CAT 3 by students who entered as first-years, or through equivalent course work by transfer students. It is recommended that students pursuing graduate degrees select “Letter Grade” at the time of enrollment. Students will not receive credit for both CAT 125 and CAT 125R. Prerequisites: Sixth College students only; upper-division standing.

CAT 125GS. Public Rhetoric and Practical Communication Global Seminar (4)
Upper-division composition course in public rhetoric and practical communication, including oral presentation, writing in print formats, and digital content-creation. This course also focuses on how writing can support and extend experiential learning before, during, or after students complete their practicum. Completion of lower-division writing requirement is preferred but not required. It is recommended that students pursuing graduate degrees select “Letter Grade” at the time of enrollment. This course is a distance education course. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; department authorization required.

CAT 125R. Public Rhetoric and Practical Communication Online (4)
Online upper-division composition course in public rhetoric and practical communication, including oral presentation, writing in print formats, and digital content-creation. This course also focuses on how writing can support and extend experiential learning before, during, or after students complete their practicum. Completion of lower-division writing sequence through taking CAT 1, CAT 2, and CAT 3 by students who entered as first-years, or through equivalent course work by transfer students. It is recommended that students pursuing graduate degrees select “Letter Grade” at the time of enrollment. Students will not receive credit for both CAT 125R and CAT 125. This course is a distance education course. Prerequisites: Sixth College students only; upper-division standing.

CAT 125RS. Public Rhetoric and Practical Communication Online Global Seminar (4)
Online upper-division composition course in public rhetoric and practical communication, including oral presentation, writing in print formats, and digital content-creation. This course also focuses on how writing can support and extend experiential learning before, during, or after students complete their practicum. Completion of lower-division writing requirement is preferred but not required. It is recommended that students pursuing graduate degrees select “Letter Grade” at the time of enrollment. This course is a distance education course. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; department authorization required.

CAT 192. Senior Seminar in Culture, Art, and Technology (1)
The Senior Seminar Program is designed to allow senior undergraduates to meet with faculty members in a small group setting to explore an intellectual topic in culture, art, and technology (at the upper-division level). Topics will vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to twenty students, with preference given to seniors. May be taken for credit four times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; department authorization required.

CAT 195. Apprentice Teaching (4)
Undergraduate instructional assistance. Responsibilities in areas of learning and instruction. May collect course material and assist with course projects, digital workshops, and collection, organization, and analysis of formative assessment data. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; 3.0 cumulative GPA; department authorization required.

CAT 197. Culture, Art, and Technology Field Studies (4)
Supervised community-based or industry-based fieldwork. Designated for Sixth College students to have the opportunity to work on a community-based or industry-based project supervised by a faculty member and community or industry mentor in which the subject or content of the project cannot be represented by a specific academic department. Students will submit written evaluations each week of their ongoing field study. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; completion of lower-division writing sequence through taking CAT 1, CAT 2, and CAT 3 by students who entered as first-years, or through equivalent course work by transfer students.

CAT 198. Culture, Art, and Technology Directed Group Studies (4)
Directed group studies or, in group, field studies of a creative project. Designated for Sixth College students to have the opportunity to work together as a group or team on a project supervised by a faculty member in a specific department, not included in a regular curriculum, where group emphasis would be more beneficial and constructive than individual special studies. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; completion of lower-division writing sequence through taking CAT 1, CAT 2, and CAT 3 by students who entered as first-years, or through equivalent course work by transfer students.

CAT 199. Culture, Art, and Technology Independent Studies (4)
Individual independent research or creative project. Designated for Sixth College students to have the opportunity to work on a project supervised by a faculty member in a specific department, where the subject or content of the project cannot be represented by the academic department of the faculty member. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; completion of lower-division writing sequence through taking CAT 1, CAT 2, and CAT 3 by students who entered as first-years, or through equivalent course work by transfer students.

DSC 10. Principles of Data Science (4)
This first course in data science introduces students to data exploration, statistical inference, and prediction. It introduces the Python programming language as a tool for tabular data manipulation, visualization, and simulation. Through homework assignments and projects, students are given an opportunity to develop their analytical skills while working with real-world datasets from a variety of domains. Prerequisites: none.

DSC 20. Programming and Basic Data Structures for Data Science (4)
Provides an understanding of the structures that underlie the programs, algorithms, and languages used in data science by expanding the repertoire of computational concepts introduced in DSC 10 and exposing students to techniques of abstraction. Course will be taught in Python and will cover topics including recursion, higher-order functions, function composition, object-oriented programming, interpreters, classes, and simple data structures such as arrays, lists, and linked lists. Prerequisites: DSC 10. Restricted to students within the DS25 major. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

DSC 30. Data Structures and Algorithms for Data Science (4)
Builds on topics covered in DSC 20 and provides practical experience in composing larger computational systems through several significant programming projects using Java. Students will study advanced programming techniques including encapsulation, abstract data types, interfaces, algorithms and complexity, and data structures such as stacks, queues, priority queues, heaps, linked lists, binary trees, binary search trees, and hash tables. Prerequisites: DSC 20. Restricted to students within the DS25 major. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

DSC 40A. Theoretical Foundations of Data Science I (4)
The sequence DSC 40A-B introduces the theoretical foundations of data science. DSC 40A, the first course in the sequence, exposes students to the mathematical theory underlying fundamental topics in machine learning. Topics include empirical risk minimization, optimization, regression, classification, and discrete probability. Students practice creative problem-solving while learning how to rigorously justify and communicate mathematical ideas. Prerequisites: DSC 10, MATH 20C or MATH 31BH, and MATH 18 or MATH 20F or MATH 31AH. Restricted to students within the DS25 major. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

DSC 40B. Theoretical Foundations of Data Science II (4)
The sequence DSC 40A-B introduces the theoretical foundations of data science. DSC 40B, the second course in the sequence, covers the fundamentals of computer science with applications to data science. Topics include time complexity analysis, the analysis of recursive algorithms, graph theory, and graph search algorithms. Whereas other courses in the curriculum, such as DSC 20 and DSC 30, may touch on these topics briefly, this course aims to develop a deeper, theoretical understanding. DSC 40A-B connect to DSC 10, 20, and 30 by providing the theoretical foundation for the methods that underlie data science. Prerequisites: DSC 20 and 40A. Restricted to students within the DS25 major. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

DSC 80. The Practice and Application of Data Science (4)
The marriage of data, computation, and inferential thinking, or “data science,” is redefining how people and organizations solve challenging problems and understand the world. This course bridges lower- and upper-division data science courses as well as methods courses in other fields. Students master the data science life-cycle and learn many of the fundamental principles and techniques of data science spanning algorithms, statistics, machine learning, visualization, and data systems. Prerequisites: DSC 30 and DSC 40A. Restricted to students within the DS25 major. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

DSC 90. Seminar in Data Science (2)
Students will learn about a variety of topics in data science through interactive presentations from faculty and industry professionals. May be taken for credit up to four times. Prerequisites: DSC 10. Restricted to students within the DS25 major. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

DSC 95. Tutor Apprenticeship in Data Science (2)
Students will receive training in skills and techniques necessary to be effective tutors for data science courses. Students will also gain practical experience in tutoring students on data science topics. Prerequisites: DSC 10. Students must have applied for and been accepted as a tutor for a DSC course for the first time; enrollment in DSC 95 is required for these students.

DSC 96. Workshop in Data Science (2)
Students will explore topics and tools relevant to the practice of data science in a workshop format. The instructor works with students on guided projects to help students acquire knowledge and skills to complement their course work in the core data science classes. Topics vary from quarter to quarter. Students are strongly recommended to enroll in either DSC 10 or DSC 20 concurrently. Prerequisites: none. Restricted to students within the DS25 major. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

DSC 97. Internship in Data Science (2 or 4)
Individual research on a topic related to data science, by special arrangement with and under the direction of a UC San Diego faculty member, in connection with an internship at an organization. It is the students’ responsibility to find an internship related to data science prior to enrolling in this course. Internship work will inform but not necessarily define the research topic. The research topic is expected to promote the study of the principles and techniques involved in the internship work. May be taken for credit up to two times. Prerequisites: MATH 20C or MATH 31BH and MATH 18 or MATH 31AH and DSC 20 and DSC 40A. Completion of thirty units at UC San Diego with a university GPA of 3.0. Special Studies form, consent of the instructor, and approval of the department required. Priority enrollment is given to data science majors DS25. Restricted to first-year and sophomore level students.

DSC 98. Directed Group Study in Data Science (2 or 4)
Students will investigate a topic in data science through directed reading, discussion, and project work under the supervision of a faculty member. May be taken for credit up to two times. Prerequisites: MATH 20C or MATH 31BH and MATH 18 or MATH 31AH and DSC 20 and DSC 40A. Completion of thirty units at UC San Diego with a university GPA of 3.0. Special Studies form, consent of the instructor, and approval of the department required. Priority enrollment is given to data science majors DS25. Restricted to first-year and sophomore level students.

DSC 99. Independent Study in Data Science (2 or 4)
Students will participate in independent study or research in data science under the direction of a UC San Diego faculty member. May be taken for credit up to two times. Prerequisites: MATH 20C or MATH 31BH and MATH 18 or MATH 31AH and DSC 20 and DSC 40A. Completion of thirty units at UC San Diego with a university GPA of 3.0. Special Studies form, consent of the instructor, and approval of the department required. Priority enrollment is given to data science majors DS25. Restricted to first-year and sophomore level students.

DSC 100. Introduction to Data Management (4)
This course is an introduction to storage and management of large-scale data using classical relational (SQL) systems, with an eye toward applications in data science. The course covers topics including the SQL data model and query language, relational data modeling and schema design, elements of cost-based query optimizations, relational data base architecture, and database-backed applications. Prerequisites: DSC 40B and DSC 80. Restricted to students with upper-division standing. Restricted to students within the DS25 major. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

DSC 102. Systems for Scalable Analytics (4)
This course introduces the principles of computing systems and infrastructure for scaling analytics to large datasets. Topics include memory hierarchy, distributed systems, model selection, heterogeneous datasets, and deployment at scale. The course will also discuss the design of systems such as MapReduce/Hadoop and Spark, in conjunction with their implementation. Students will also learn how dataflow operations can be used to perform data preparation, cleaning, and feature engineering. Prerequisites: DSC 100. Restricted to students with upper-division standing. Restricted to students within the DS25 major. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

DSC 104. Beyond Relational Data Management (4)
The course will introduce a variety of No-SQL data formats, data models, high-level query languages, and programming abstractions representative of the needs of modern data analytic tasks. Topics include hierarchical graph database systems, unrestricted graph database systems, array databases, comparison of expressive power of the data models, and parallel programming abstractions, including Map/Reduce and its descendants. Prerequisites: DSC 100. Restricted to students with upper-division standing. Restricted to students within the DS25 major. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

DSC 106. Introduction to Data Visualization (4)
Data visualization helps explore and interpret data through interaction. This course introduces the principles, techniques, and algorithms for creating effective visualizations. The course draws on the knowledge from several disciplines including computer graphics, human-computer interaction, cognitive psychology, design, and statistical graphics and synthesizes relevant ideas. Students will design visualization systems using D3 or other web-based software and evaluate their effectiveness. Prerequisites: DSC 80. Restricted to students with upper-division standing. Restricted to students within the DS25 major. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

DSC 120. Signal Processing for Data Analysis (4)
This course will focus on ideas from classical and modern signal processing, with the main themes of sampling continuous data and building informative representations using orthonormal bases, frames, and data dependent operators. Topics include sampling theory, Fourier analysis, lossy transformations and compression, time and spatial filters, and random Fourier features and connections to kernel methods. Sources of data include time series and streaming signals and various imaging modalities. Prerequisites: MATH 18 or MATH 31AH and MATH 20C and DSC 40B. Restricted to students with upper-division standing. Restricted to students within the DS25 major. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

DSC 140A. Probabilistic Modeling and Machine Learning (4)
The course covers learning and using probabilistic models for knowledge representation and decision-making. Topics covered include graphical models, temporal models, and online learning, as well as applications to natural language processing, adversarial learning, computational biology, and robotics. Prior completion of MATH 181A is strongly recommended. Prerequisites: DSC 80 and ECE 109 or ECON 120A or MAE 108 or MATH 180A or MATH 183 or MATH 186. Restricted to students with upper-division standing. Restricted to students within the DS25 major. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

DSC 140B. Representation Learning (4)
This course is an introduction to machine learning which explores techniques for learning suitable representations from data. Topics include clustering, dimensionality reduction, manifold learning, principal component analysis, spectral embeddings, multilayer perceptrons, autoencoders, convolutional and recurrent neural networks, and other aspects of deep learning. The course focuses on the underlying mathematical principles, but some attention is also given to implementation. Prerequisites: DSC 80, ECE 109 or ECON 120A or MAE 108 or MATH 180A or MATH 183 or MATH 186. Restricted to students within the DS25 major. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

DSC 148. Introduction to Data Mining (4)
This course mainly focuses on introducing current methods and models that are useful in analyzing and mining real-world data. It will cover frequent pattern mining, regression and classification, clustering, and representation learning. All participants should be comfortable with programming, and with basic optimization and linear algebra. Prerequisites: DSC 40B or CSE 12, DSC 80 or CSE 15L, MATH 180A or MATH 181A or MATH 183 or CSE 103 or ECE 109 or ECON 120A. Students may not receive credit for DSC 148 and CSE 158 or CSE 158R. Restricted to students within the DS25 major. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

DSC 155. Hidden Data in Random Matrices (4)
Rigorous treatment of principal component analysis, one of the most effective methods in finding signals amidst the noise of large data arrays. Topics include singular value decomposition for matrices, maximal likelihood estimation, least squares methods, unbiased estimators, random matrices, Wigner’s semicircle law, Markchenko-Pastur laws, universality of eigenvalue statistics, outliers, the BBP transition, applications to community detection, and stochastic block model. Prerequisites: MATH 180A and (MATH 18 or MATH 31AH). Students will not receive credit for both MATH 182 and DSC 155.

DSC 160. Data Science and the Arts (4)
This course addresses the intersection of data science and contemporary arts and culture, exploring four main themes of authorship, representation, visualization, and data provenance. The course is not solely an introduction to data science techniques nor merely an arts practice course, but explores significant new possibilities for both fields arising from their intersection. Students will examine problems from complementary perspectives of artist-researchers and data scientists. Prerequisites: DSC 80.

DSC 161. Text as Data (4)
This class explores statistical and computational methods to enable students to use text as a data source in the social sciences. Hands-on examples will equip students to work with text data in final projects. Prerequisites: ECON 5 or POLI 170A or POLI 171 or POLI 30 or POLI 30D or POLI 5 or POLI 5D. Students will not receive credit for both POLI 176 and DSC 161. Restricted to junior and senior level students. Restricted to students with upper-division standing.

DSC 167. Fairness and Algorithmic Decision-Making (4)
This course examines the greater context under which the practice of data science exists and explores concrete ways these issues surface in technical work. Students learn frameworks for understanding how individuals relate to social institutions, how to use them to identify how issues of fairness arise in the “life of a data scientist,” and use them to propose and critique potential solutions. Prerequisites: DSC 80.

DSC 170. Spatial Data Science and Applications (4)
Spatial data science is a set of concepts and methods that deal with accessing, managing, visualizing, analyzing, and reasoning about spatial data in applications where location, shape and size of objects, and their mutual arrangement are important. This upper-division course explores advanced data science concepts for spatial data, introducing students to principles and techniques of spatial data analysis, including geographic information systems, spatial big data management, and geostatistics. Prerequisites: DSC 80. Restricted to students with upper-division standing.

DSC 180A. Data Science Project I (4)
In this two-course sequence students will investigate a topic and design a system to produce statistically informed output. The investigation will span the entire lifecycle, including assessing the problem, learning domain knowledge, collecting/cleaning data, creating a model, addressing ethical issues, designing the system, analyzing the output, and presenting the results. 180A deals with research, methodology, and system design. Students will produce a research summary and a project proposal. Prerequisites: DSC 102 and MATH 189 and CSE 151A or COGS 188 or CSE 158 or CSE 158R or DSC 148 and DSC 106. Restricted to students with upper-division standing. Restricted to students within the DS25 major.

DSC 180B. Data Science Project II (4)
In this two-course sequence students will investigate a topic and design a system to produce statistically informed output. The investigation will span the entire lifecycle, including assessing the problem, learning domain knowledge, collecting/cleaning data, creating a model, addressing ethical issues, designing the system, analyzing the output, and presenting the results. 180B will consist of implementing the project while studying the best practices for evaluation. Prerequisites: DSC 180A. Students are only cleared to enroll into the discussion section associated with their DSC 180A discussion section. Restricted to students with upper-division standing. Restricted to students within the DS25 major.

DSC 190. Topics in Data Science (4)
Topics of special interest in data science. Topics vary from quarter to quarter. May be taken for credit up to four times when topic varies. Prerequisites: department and instructor approval required to monitor enrollment and to ensure that students have the sufficient educational background for a given topic. Restricted to students with upper-division standing.

DSC 191. Seminar in Data Science (1 or 2)
A seminar course on topics of current interest in data science. Topics may vary from quarter to quarter. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: restricted to students with upper-division standing. Department and instructor approval is required to monitor enrollment and to ensure that students have the sufficient educational background for a given topic.

DSC 197. Data Science Internship (1–4)
Directed study and research at laboratories/institutions outside of campus. It is the students’ responsibility to find an internship related to data science prior to enrolling in this course. Prerequisites: restricted to students with upper-division standing. Consent of the instructor and approval of the department. An application for Special Studies must be filed with the Registrar’s office after approval from the instructor and the department chair.

DSC 198. Directed Group Study in Data Science (2 or 4)
Data science topics whose study involves reading and discussion by a small group of students under supervision of a faculty member. May be taken for credit up to two times. Prerequisites: restricted to students with upper-division standing. Consent of the instructor and approval of the department. Department stamp required. An application for Special Studies must be filed with the Registrar’s office after approval from the instructor and the department chair.

DSC 199. Independent Study for Data Science Undergraduates (2 or 4)
Independent reading or research on a topic related to data science by special arrangement with a faculty member. May be taken for credit up to two times. Prerequisites: restricted to students with upper-division standing. Consent of the instructor and approval of the department. An application for Special Studies must be filed with the Registrar’s Office after approval from the instructor and the department chair.

DSGN 1. Design of Everyday Things (4)
A project-based course examining how principles from cognitive science apply to the design of things simple (doors) and complex (new technology). Learn about affordances, constraints, mappings, and conceptual models. Learn observational and design skills. Become a human-centered design thinker.

DSGN 90. Undergraduate Seminar (1)
Special topics in design are discussed. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit four times when topics vary.

DSGN 99. Independent Study (2 or 4)
Independent literature or laboratory research by arrangement with and under direction of a design faculty member. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: lower-division standing, completion of thirty units of UC San Diego undergraduate study, a minimum UC San Diego GPA of 3.0, and a completed and approved Special Studies form.

DSGN 100. Prototyping (4)
Explores cognitive principles of thinking through making. Introduces methods and tools for prototyping user experiences. Students make various prototypes and participate in weekly critique sessions. Topics: experience design, rapid prototyping, sketching, bodystorming, cardboard modeling, UI hacking, and design theory. Prerequisites: DSGN 1.

DSGN 118. Design for Future Creativity and Productivity (4)
This course covers fundamentals of the design of creativity support tools for various types of digital content, including images, videos, animations, information visualization, augmented/mixed/virtual reality. We will also explore how novel interaction techniques such as gestural interaction, speech input, and artificial intelligence can be used to support people’s creativity and productivity. Prerequisites: COGS 120 or COGS 187A or COGS 187B or CSE 170 or DSGN 100.

DSGN 119. Design at Large (2)
New societal challenges, cultural values, and technological opportunities are changing design—and vice versa. The seminar explores this increased scale, real-world engagement, and disruptive impact. Invited speakers from UC San Diego and beyond share cutting-edge research on interaction, design, and learning. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit up to four times. Prerequisites: COMM 124A or COGS 10 or DSGN 1.

DSGN 160. Special Topics in Design (4)
Special topics in design. May be taken for credit three times when topics vary. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

DSGN 161. Design Project (4)
Special topics in design. May be taken for credit three times when topics vary. Recommended preparation: may require shop skills. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

DSGN 195. Instructional Apprenticeship in Design (4)
Students, under the direction of the instructor, lead laboratory or discussion sections, attend lectures, and meet regularly with the instructor to help prepare course materials and grade papers and exams. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing, 3.0 GPA, consent of instructor, and department approval.

DSGN 198. Directed Group Study in Design (2 or 4)
This directed group study course is for small groups of advanced students who wish to complete a one-quarter reading or research project under the mentorship of a faculty member. Students should contact faculty whose research interests them to discuss possible projects. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit up to three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing, 2.5 GPA, consent of instructor, and department approval.

DSGN 199. Independent Project in Design (2 or 4)
This independent project course is for individual, advanced students who wish to complete a design project under the mentorship of a faculty member. Students should contact faculty whose research interests them to discuss possible projects. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing, 2.5 GPA, consent of instructor, and department approval.

DOC 1. Dimensions of Culture: Diversity (4)
This course focuses on sociocultural diversity in examining class, ethnicity, race, gender, and sexuality as significant markers of differences among persons. Emphasizing American society while cultivating students’ critical reading skills, it explores the cultural understandings of diversity and its economic, moral, and political consequences. Restrictions: Marshall College students only, must be taken for a letter grade. Prerequisites: satisfaction of UC Entry Level Writing Requirement or concurrent enrollment in AWP 3, Analytical Writing. (F)

DOC 2. Dimensions of Culture: Justice (6)
This course considers the nature of justice in philosophical, historical, and legal terms. Topics include racial justice, political representation, economic justice, gender and justice, the rights of cultural minorities, and crime and punishment. The course offers intensive instruction in writing university-level expository prose, specifically thesis-based argumentative essays. Restrictions: Marshall College students only, must be taken for a letter grade. Prerequisites: satisfaction of UC Entry Level Writing Requirement and completion of DOC 1. Enrollment by department approval only. (W)

DOC 3. Dimensions of Culture: Imagination (6)
This course examines the relevance of sociocultural diversity and the nature of justice in explicitly local and contemporary contexts. Students are asked to imagine and propose rigorously researched and interdisciplinary solutions to issues relevant to their own lived experiences. The course offers intensive instruction in writing university-level expository prose, with special emphasis on developing a research process. Restrictions: Marshall College students only, must be taken for a letter grade. Prerequisites: DOC 2. (S)

DOC 100D. Dimensions of Culture: Promises and Contradictions in US Culture (4)
This course provides a broad overview of key historical contradictions in US history and explores the origins of social stratifications and movements. Students acquire tools for analyzing national tensions. Central aspects include slavery, women’s rights, and rising corporate power. Course introduces concepts at the intersections of class, gender, religion, race, and sexuality. Students learn to analyze and discuss complex historical/societal artifacts. Designed for two student sectors: 1) Marshall College transfer students who have not taken the DOC sequence, and 2) Transfer and other upper-division students from all seven colleges who want to fulfill the campuswide diversity requirement. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and completion of college writing.

ECON 1. Principles of Microeconomics (4)
Introduction to the study of the economic system. Course will introduce the standard economic models used to examine how individuals and firms make decisions in perfectly competitive markets, and how these decisions affect supply and demand in output markets.

ECON 2. Market Imperfections and Policy (4)
Analysis of monopoly and imperfectly competitive markets, market imperfections and the role of government. Prerequisites: ECON 1.

ECON 3. Principles of Macroeconomics (4)
Introductory macroeconomics: unemployment, inflation, business cycles, monetary and fiscal policy. Prerequisites: ECON 1.

ECON 4. Financial Accounting (4)
(Cross-listed with MGT 4.) Recording, organizing, and communicating financial information relating to business entities. Credit not allowed for both ECON 4 and MGT 4.

ECON 5. Data Analytics for the Social Sciences (4)
(Cross-listed with POLI 5D.) Introduction to probability and analysis for understanding data in the social world. Students engage in hands-on learning with applied social science problems. Basics of probability, visual display of data, data collection and management, hypothesis testing, and computation. Students may receive credit for only one of the following courses: ECON 5, POLI 5, or POLI 5D.

ECON 87. First-year Student Seminar in Economics (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students. May be repeated when course topics vary. (P/NP grades only.)

ECON 100A. Microeconomics A (4)
Economic analysis of household determination of the demand for goods and services, consumption/saving decisions, and the supply of labor. Prerequisites: ECON 1 and MATH 10C or 20C or 31BH.

ECON 100B. Microeconomics B (4)
Analysis of firms’ production and costs, the supply of output and demand factors of production. Analysis of perfectly competitive markets. Prerequisites: ECON 100A.

ECON 100C. Microeconomics C (4)
Analysis of the effects of imperfect market structure, strategy, and imperfect information. Prerequisites: ECON 100B.

ECON 100AH. Honors Microeconomics A (1)
Honors sequence expanding on the material taught in ECON 100A. Major GPA of 3.5 or better required. May be taken concurrently with ECON 100A or after successful completion of ECON 100A with A– or better or consent of instructor. Priority enrollment given to majors in the department. Prerequisites: department approval required.

ECON 100BH. Honors Microeconomics B (1)
Honors sequence expanding on the material taught in ECON 100B. Major GPA of 3.5 or better required. May be taken concurrently with ECON 100B or after successful completion of ECON 100B with A– or better or consent of instructor. Priority enrollment given to majors in the department. Prerequisites: department approval required.

ECON 100CH. Honors Microeconomics C (1)
Honors sequence expanding on the material taught in ECON 100C. Major GPA of 3.5 or better required. May be taken concurrently with ECON 100C or after successful completion of ECON 100C with A– or better or consent of instructor. Priority enrollment given to majors in the department. Prerequisites: department approval required.

ECON 101. International Trade (4)
Examines theories of international trade in goods and services and relates the insights to empirical evidence. Explains international trade at the level of industries and firms and analyzes the consequences of trade for resource allocation, welfare, and the income distribution. Discusses sources of comparative advantage, motives for trade policies, and the effects of trade barriers and trading blocs on welfare and incomes. Prerequisites: ECON 100B or 102.

ECON 102. Globalization (4)
Presents theories of global economic integration, grounded in the principle of comparative advantage. Investigates patterns of trade when trade is balanced and capital flows when trade is not balanced. Assesses the consequences of global economic integration and economic policies for industry location, incomes, welfare and economic growth, and studies goods, services and sovereign debt markets. Prerequisites: ECON 1 or 100B and 2 or 3 or MATH 20C.

ECON 102T. Advanced Topic in Globalization (2)
This course presents a selection of empirical applications and advanced topics that build on the material covered in ECON 102, Globalization. Students have the opportunity to analyze global trade and capital market data and to prepare a presentation and brief paper on a specific topic. Prerequisites: department approval required. May be taken concurrently with ECON 102 or after completion of ECON 102.

ECON 103. International Monetary Relations (4)
Analyzes exchange rates and the current account. Relates their joint determination to financial markets and the real-side macroeconomy using international macroeconomic models and presents empirical regularities. Discusses macroeconomic policies under different exchange rate regimes and implications for financial stability and current account sustainability. Prerequisites: ECON 102 or 110B or 173A.

ECON 104. Nobody’s Fool: Economics with Morals (2)
The prevailing paradigm in economics is self-interest, but what if acting unselfishly is what is in your self-interest? We will explore economic questions from the viewpoint that individuals have moral values that guide how they live. This allows us to address issues like fairness, love, marriage, giving, identity, conformity, discrimination, crime, punishment, and reparations. Prerequisites: ECON 100C.

ECON 105. Industrial Organization and Firm Strategy (4)
Theory of monopoly and oligopoly pricing, price discrimination, durable goods pricing, cartel behavior, price wars, strategic entry barriers, mergers, pro- and anticompetitive restraints on business. Prerequisites: ECON 100C.

ECON 106. International Economic Agreements (4)
Examines reasons for international economic agreements, their design, the strategic interactions that determine how the agreements are implemented and sustained, and consequences for global welfare and inequality. Draws on international economics, game theory, law and economics, and political economy to understand international economic agreements. These tools are used to understand multilateral trade and investment agreements, such as NAFTA, and international organizations, such as the WTO. Prerequisites: ECON 100B and 102.

ECON 107. Economic Regulation and Antitrust Policy (4)
Detailed treatment of antitrust policy: Sherman Act, price fixing, collusive practices, predatory pricing, price discrimination, double marginalization, exclusive territories, resale price maintenance, refusal to deal, and foreclosure. Theory of regulation and regulatory experience in electrical utilities, oil, telecommunications, broadcasting, etc. Prerequisites: ECON 2 or 100B; and MATH 10C or 20C or 31BH.

ECON 109. Game Theory (4)
Introduction to game theory. Analysis of people’s decisions when the consequences of the decisions depend on what other people do. This course features applications in economics, political science, and law. Prerequisites: ECON 100C or MATH 31CH or MATH 109 or (CSE 20 and MATH 20 C).

ECON 109T. Advanced Topics in Game Theory (2)
This course presents a selection of applications and advanced topics that build on the material covered in the ECON 109. Game Theory course. Prerequisites: department approval required. May be taken concurrently with ECON 109 or after completion of ECON 109.

ECON 110A. Long Run Macroeconomics (4)
Analysis of the determination of long run growth and models of the determination of output, interest rates, and the price level. Analysis of inflation, unemployment, and monetary and fiscal policy. Prerequisites: ECON 1 and ECON 3 and MATH 10C or MATH 20C or MATH 31BH.

ECON 110B. Short Run Macroeconomics (4)
Analysis of the determination of consumption spending at the aggregate level; extension of the basic macro model to include exchange rates and international trade; the aggregate money supply, and the business cycle. Prerequisites: ECON 1 and ECON 3 and MATH 10C or MATH 20C or MATH 31BH.

ECON 110AH. Honors Macroeconomics A (1)
Honors sequence expanding on the material taught in ECON 110A. Major GPA of 3.5 or better required. May be taken concurrently with ECON 110A or after successful completion of ECON 110A with A–or better or consent of instructor. Priority enrollment given to majors in the department. Prerequisites: department approval required.

ECON 110BH. Honors Macroeconomics B (1)
Honors sequence expanding on the material taught in ECON 110B. Major GPA of 3.5 or better required. May be taken concurrently with ECON 110B or after successful completion of ECON 110B with A– or better or consent of instructor. Priority enrollment given to majors in the department. Prerequisites: department approval required.

ECON 111. Monetary Economics (4)
Financial structure of the US economy. Bank behavior. Monetary control. Prerequisites: ECON 110B.

ECON 112. Macroeconomic Data Analysis (4)
Examines time series methods for data analysis with an emphasis on macroeconomic applications. Students are provided with an overview of fundamental time series techniques, hands-on experience in applying them to real-world macroeconomic data, and expertise in performing empirical tests of policy-relevant macroeconomic theories, such as the permanent income hypothesis, the Keynesian fiscal multiplier, and the Phillips curve. Prerequisites: ECON 110B and ECON 120B or MATH 181B. Enrollment limited to majors in the Department of Economics and MA33 only.

ECON 113. Mathematical Economics (4)
Mathematical concepts and techniques used in advanced economic analysis; applications to selected aspects of economic theory. Prerequisites: ECON 100C or MATH 140A or MATH 142A and MATH 18 or MATH 31AH.

ECON 116. Economic Development (4)
Introduction to the economics of less developed countries, covering their international trade, human resources, urbanization, agriculture, income distribution, political economy, and environment. Prerequisites: ECON 2 or 100B.

ECON 117. Economic Growth (4)
Basic economic dynamics, consumption versus growth with fixed or growing populations, the Harrod-Domar growth model, the neoclassical growth model, optimal growth, the Golden Rule, money and economic growth, technological progress and economic growth, human capital and endogenous economic growth, and alternative theories of growth and distribution. Prerequisites: ECON 100A.

ECON 118. Law and Economics: Torts, Property, and Crime (4)
Uses economic theory to evaluate the economic effects of US law in several legal fields, including tort law (accidents), products liability law, property law, criminal law (law enforcement), and litigation. Also considers risk bearing and why people buy insurance. Prerequisites: ECON 2 or 100A; and MATH 10A or 20A.

ECON 119. Law and Economics: Contracts and Corporations (4)
This course asks how firms are organized and why the corporate form dominates, how corporations are governed and the distortions that result, when firms borrow and how they deal with financial distress and bankruptcy. The course will present basic legal doctrines in corporate law, contract law, debtor-creditor law, and bankruptcy, and use economic models to analyze whether and when these doctrines promote economically efficient behavior. Prerequisites: ECON 2 or 100A and MATH 10A or 20A.

ECON 120A. Econometrics A (4)
Probability and statistics used in economics. Probability and sampling theory, statistical inference, and use of spreadsheets. Credit not allowed for ECON 120A after ECE 109, MAE 108, MATH 180A, MATH 183, or MATH 186. Prerequisites: ECON 1; and MATH 10C or 20C or 31BH.

ECON 120B. Econometrics B (4)
Basic econometric methods, including the linear regression, hypothesis testing, quantifying uncertainty using confidence intervals, and distinguishing correlation from causality. Credit not allowed for both ECON 120B after MATH 181B. Prerequisites: ECON 120A or ECE 109 or MAE 108 or MATH 180A or MATH 183 or MATH 186.

ECON 120C. Econometrics C (4)
Advanced econometric methods: estimation of linear regression models with endogeneity, economic methods designed for panel data sets, estimation of discrete choice models, time series analysis, and estimation in the presence of autocorrelated and heteroskedastic errors. Prerequisites: ECON 120B or MATH 181B.

ECON 120AH. Honors Econometrics A (1)
Honors sequence expanding on the material taught in ECON 120A. Major GPA of 3.5 or better required. May be taken concurrently with ECON 120A or after successful completion of ECON 120A with A– or better or consent of instructor. Priority enrollment given to majors in the department. Prerequisites: department approval required.

ECON 120BH. Honors Econometrics B (1)
Honors sequence expanding on the material taught in ECON 120B. Major GPA of 3.5 or better required. May be taken concurrently with ECON 120B or after successful completion of ECON 120B with A– or better or consent of instructor. Priority enrollment given to majors in the department. Prerequisites: department approval required.

ECON 120CH. Honors Econometrics C (1)
Honors sequence expanding on the material taught in ECON 120C. Major GPA of 3.5 or better required. May be taken concurrently with ECON 120C or after successful completion of ECON 120C with A– or better or consent of instructor. Priority enrollment given to majors in the department. Prerequisites: department approval required.

ECON 121. Applied Econometrics and Data Analysis (4)
Theoretically develops extensions to the standard econometric toolbox, studies their application in scientific research, and applies them to data. Emphasis is on using techniques, and on understanding and critically assessing others’ use of them. Requires practical work on the computer using a range of data from around the world. Topics include advanced regression analysis, limited dependent variables, nonparametric methods, and new methods for causal inference. Prerequisites: ECON 120C.

ECON 122. Econometric Theory (4)
Detailed study of the small sample and asymptotic properties of estimators commonly used in applied econometric work: multiple linear regression, instrumental variables, generalized method of moments, and maximum likelihood. Econometric computation using MATLAB. Recommended preparation: ECON 120C. Prerequisites: ECON 120B or MATH 181B and MATH 18 or MATH 31AH.

ECON 125. Demographic Analysis and Forecasting (4)
Interaction between economic forces and demographic changes are considered, as are demographic composition and analysis; fertility, mortality, and migration processes and trends. Course emphasizes the creation, evaluation, and interpretation of forecasts for states, regions, and subcounty areas. ECON 178 is recommended. Prerequisites: ECON 120B or MATH 181B.

ECON 129. Cities, Inequality, Innovation (4)
Explores the dual role of cities as places of innovation and job creation but also places of great economic inequality and segregation over the last century. Studies the experience of American cities, identifying fundamental forces that made them prosper or decline. Connect cities to observed aggregate trends in innovation, job creation, and economic inequality. Practices use of GIS software to organize and analyze spatial data. Prerequisites: ECON 110A and (ECON 120A or ECE 109 or MAE 108 or MATH 180A or MATH 183 or MATH 186).

ECON 130. Public Policy (4)
Course uses basic microeconomic tools to discuss a wide variety of public issues, including the war on drugs, global warming, natural resources, health care and safety regulation. Appropriate for majors who have not completed ECON 100A-B-C and students from other departments. Prerequisites: ECON 2 or 100A.

ECON 131. Economics of the Environment (4)
Environmental issues from an economic perspective. Relation of the environment to economic growth. Management of natural resources, such as forest and fresh water. Policies on air, water, and toxic waste pollution. International issues such as ozone depletion and sustainable development. Prerequisites: ECON 2 or 100A.

ECON 132. Energy Economics (4)
Energy from an economic perspective. Fuel cycles for coal, hydro, nuclear, oil, and solar energy. Emphasis on efficiency and control of pollution. Comparison of energy use across sectors and across countries. Global warming. Role of energy in the international economy. Prerequisites: ECON 1 and (ECON 2 or 3 or 100A or 131 or ESYS 103 or MAE 124) and MATH 10C or 20C or 31BH.

ECON 134. US Budget Policy (4)
The course examines major issues relating to US budget policy, including deficits and debt, distributional and efficiency effects of the tax system, Social Security and disability insurance, and transfer programs. We build on empirical and theoretical tools to give students a framework for understanding the practice of US budget policymaking in relation to current economic debates. Prerequisites: ECON 100A. Enrollment limited to majors in the Department of Economics.

ECON 135. Urban Economics (4)
(Cross-listed with USP 102.) Economic analysis of why cities develop, patterns of land use in cities, why cities suburbanize, and the pattern of urban commuting. The course also examines problems of urban congestion, air pollution, zoning, poverty, crime, and discusses public policies to deal with them. Credit not allowed for both ECON 135 and USP 102. Prerequisites: ECON 2 or 100A; and MATH 10A or 20A.

ECON 136. Human Resources (4)
A practical yet theory-based study of the firm’s role in managing workers, including issues related to hiring, education and training, promotions, layoffs and buyouts, and the overarching role that worker compensation plays in all of these. Prerequisites: ECON 100B.

ECON 137. Corruption (4)
This course examines corruption in developing countries today, with the aims of understanding why it occurs, what the consequences are, and what can or should be done about it. In the process, we will endeavor to build practical problem-solving and communication skills. As such, the course is designed for future leaders in business, nonprofit, and public service settings who seek to develop their ability to map high-quality research into pragmatic enterprise decision making. Prerequisites: ECON 100C and 120C. Enrollment limited to majors in the Department of Economics and MA33 only; department approval required.

ECON 138. Economics of Discrimination (4)
This course will investigate differences in economic outcomes on the basis of race, gender, ethnicity, religion, and sexual orientation. We will study economic theories of discrimination, empirical work testing those theories, and policies aimed at alleviating group-level differences in economic outcomes. Prerequisites: ECON 1.

ECON 139. Labor Economics (4)
Theoretical and empirical analysis of labor markets. Topics include labor supply, labor demand, human capital investment, wage inequality, labor mobility, immigration, labor market discrimination, labor unions and unemployment. Prerequisites: ECON 2 or 100B.

ECON 140. Economics of Health Producers (4)
Provides an overview of the physician, hospital, and pharmaceutical segments of the health sector. Uses models of physician behavior, for-profit and nonprofit institutions to understand the trade-offs facing health-sector regulators and the administrators of public and private insurance arrangements. Prerequisites: ECON 2 or 100B.

ECON 141. Economics of Health Consumers (4)
Demand for health care and health insurance, employer provision of health insurance and impact on wages and job changes. Cross-country comparisons of health systems. Prerequisites: ECON 100C.

ECON 142. Behavioral Economics (4)
Course will study economic models in which standard economic rationality assumptions are combined with psychologically plausible assumptions on behavior. We consider whether the new models improve ability to predict and understand phenomena including altruism, trust and reciprocity, procrastination, and self-control. Prerequisites: ECON 109.

ECON 143. Experimental Economics (4)
Explore use of experiments to study individual and interactive (strategic) decision making. Topics may include choice over risky alternatives, altruism and reciprocity, allocation and information aggregation in competitive markets, cooperation and collusion, bidding in auctions, strategy in coordination and “outguessing” games. Prerequisites: ECON 100C. Enrollment limited to majors in the Department of Economics and MA33 only.

ECON 144. Economics of Conservation (4)
Examines conservation of biodiversity from an economic perspective. Topics include valuing biodiversity, defining successful conservation, and evaluating the cost effectiveness of policies such as conservation payments, ecotourism, and privatization. Emphasis on forests, coral reefs, elephants, tigers, and sea turtles. Prerequisites: ECON 2 or 100A.

ECON 145. Economics of Ocean Resources (4)
Economic issues associated with oceans. Economics of managing renewable resources in the oceans, with an emphasis on fisheries, economics of conservation and biodiversity preservation for living marine resources, with an emphasis on whales, dolphins, sea turtles, and coral reefs. Prerequisites: ECON 2 or 100A.

ECON 146. Economic Stabilization (4)
Theory of business cycles and techniques used by governments to stabilize an economy. Discussion of recent economic experience. Prerequisites: ECON 110B.

ECON 147. Economics of Education (4)
Examination of issues in education using theoretical and empirical approaches from economics. Analysis of decisions to invest in education. Consideration of various market structures in education, including school choice and school finance programs. Prerequisites: ECON 2 or 100A; and ECON 120B or MATH 181B.

ECON 149. Introduction to Economic Design (4)
The course will examine the theory and practice of designing markets and institutions for strategic agents. We will discuss applications in auctions, voting and social choice, online platforms, resource allocation, and matching markets. Prerequisites: none.

ECON 150. Public Economics: Taxation (4)
Overview of the existing national tax structure in the United States, its effects on individual and firm decisions, and the resulting efficiency costs and distributional consequences. The course concludes with an examination of several commonly-proposed tax reforms. Prerequisites: ECON 100C.

ECON 151. Public Economics: Expenditures I (4)
Overview of the public sector in the United States and the scope of government intervention in economic life. Theory of public goods and externalities. Discussion of specific expenditure programs such as education and national defense. Prerequisites: ECON 100C.

ECON 152. Public Economics: Expenditures II (4)
Overview of the public sector in the United States and the justifications for government intervention in economic life. Theory of income redistribution and social insurance. Applications to current policy in such areas as health insurance, welfare, unemployment insurance, and Social Security. Prerequisites: ECON 100C.

ECON 152T. Advanced Topics in Family Economics and Social Insurance (2)
Investigate design of social insurance in the context of the family. Learn effects of economic shocks, such as unemployment and adverse health events, on the family as the economic unit. Learning outcomes include informal self-insurance arrangements and spillovers across family members. Use theory to study welfare implications of findings on optimal design of social insurance policies. Prerequisites: ECON 152.

ECON 158. Economic History of the United States I (4)
(Cross-listed with HIUS 140.) The United States as a raw materials producer, as an agrarian society, and as an industrial nation. Emphasis on the logic of the growth process, the social and political tensions accompanying expansion, and nineteenth- and early twentieth-century transformations of American capitalism. Credit not allowed for both ECON 158 and HIUS 140. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

ECON 159. Economic History of the United States II (4)
(Cross-listed with HIUS 141.) The United States as a modern industrial nation. Emphasis on the logic of the growth process, the social and political tensions accompanying expansion, and twentieth-century transformations of American capitalism. Credit not allowed for both ECON 159 and HIUS 141. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

ECON 162. Economics of Mexico (4)
Survey of the Mexican economy. Topics such as economic growth, business cycles, saving-investment balance, financial markets, fiscal and monetary policy, labor markets, industrial structure, international trade, and agricultural policy. Prerequisites: ECON 1 and 3.

ECON 164. The Indian Economy (4)
Survey of the Indian economy. Historical overview and perspective; political economy; democracy and development; economic growth; land, labor, and credit markets; poverty and inequality; health, education, and human development; technology and development; institutions and state capacity; contemporary policy issues and debates. Prerequisites: ECON 1 and 3.

ECON 164T. Advanced Topics in the Indian Economy (2)
ECON 164T will cover topics in more depth than in ECON 164 with more extensive readings and discussion. The class will meet in a seminar format where students will be expected to actively participate in discussions based on the readings and write a short paper at the end of the quarter. Prerequisites: department approval required. May be taken concurrently with ECON 164 or after completion of ECON 164.

ECON 165. Middle East Economics (4)
Socioeconomic development in the Arab world, Iran, and Turkey. Historical perspective; international trade and fuel resources; education, health, and gender gaps; unemployment and migration; population and environment; Islam and democracy. Prerequisites: ECON 1 and 3.

ECON 165T. Advanced Topics in Middle East Economics (2)
This course will cover certain country experiences and certain topics in more depth than in ECON 165. Students will also have the opportunity to choose countries and topics of particular interest to them for further reading and as subjects for a presentation and brief paper. Prerequisites: department approval required. May be taken concurrently with ECON 165 or after completion of ECON 165.

ECON 167. Economics of China (4)
Survey of the Chinese economy. Topics such as economic growth, China’s transition to a market economy, international trade, financial markets, labor markets, and industrial structure. Prerequisites: ECON 1 and 3.

ECON 168. Economics of Modern Israel (4)
This course explores economic processes that shape the Israeli economy. Topics include biblical economics, economics of religion, economic growth, income inequality and consumer protests, employment, globalization, inflation, the high-tech sector, terrorism, and education. Prerequisites: ECON 1 and 3.

ECON 169. Economics of Korea (4)
This course covers long-run economic development and current economic issues of South Korea. Topics include examination of major policy changes (e.g., shifts toward export promotion, heavy and chemical industries promotion); Korea’s industrial structure, including the role of large enterprises (chaebol); role of government; and links between Korea and other countries. Prerequisites: ECON 3 and 100A.

ECON 171. Decisions Under Uncertainty (4)
Decision making when the consequences are uncertain. Decision trees, payoff tables, decision criteria, expected utility theory, risk aversion, and applications to investments and asset pricing. Prerequisites: ECON 100A and ECE 109 or MAE 108 or MATH 181A or ECON 120A or MATH 180A or MATH 183 or MATH 186 or MATH 180B.

ECON 172A. Operations Research A (4)
Linear and integer programming, elements of zero-sum, two-person game theory, and specific combinatorial algorithms. Credit not allowed for both ECON 172A and MATH 171A. Prerequisites: ECON 100A; and ECON 120A or ECE 109 or MATH 180A or MATH 183 or MATH 186; and MATH 18 or 31AH.

ECON 172B. Operations Research B (4)
Nonlinear programming, deterministic and stochastic dynamic programming, queuing theory, search models, and inventory models. Credit not allowed for both ECON 172B and MATH 171B. Prerequisites: ECON 172A or MATH 171A.

ECON 173A. Financial Markets (4)
Financial market functions, institutions and instruments: stocks, bonds, cash instruments, derivatives (options), etc. Discussion of no-arbitrage arguments, as well as investors’ portfolio decisions and the basic risk-return trade-off established in market equilibrium. Prerequisites: ECON 100A and ECON 120B or MATH 181B; and MATH 18 or 31AH.

ECON 173B. Corporate Finance (4)
Introduces the firm’s capital budgeting decision, including methods for evaluation and ranking of investment projects, the firm’s choice of capital structure, dividend policy decisions, corporate taxes, mergers and acquisitions. Prerequisites: ECON 4 or MGT 4; and ECON 173A.

ECON 174. Financial Risk Management (4)
Risk measures, hedging techniques, value of risk to firms, estimation of optimal hedge ratio, risk management with options and futures. ECON 171 is recommended. Prerequisites: ECON 173A.

ECON 176. Marketing (4)
Role of marketing in the economy. Topics such as buyer behavior, marketing mix, promotion, product selection, pricing, and distribution. Concurrent enrollment in ECON 120C is permitted. Prerequisites: ECON 120C.

ECON 178. Economic and Business Forecasting (4)
Survey of theoretical and practical aspects of statistical and economic forecasting. Such topics as long-run and short-run horizons, leading indicator analysis, econometric models, technological and population forecasts, forecast evaluation, and the use of forecasts for public policy. Prerequisites: ECON 120C. Enrollment limited to majors in the Department of Economics and MA33 only.

ECON 181. Topics in Economics (4)
Selected topics in economics. May be taken for credit up to three times. Prerequisites: ECON 1 and ECON 3.

ECON 182. Topics in Microeconomics (4)
Selected topics in microeconomics. Prerequisites: ECON 100C.

ECON 183. Topics in Macroeconomics (4)
May be taken for credit up to three times. Prerequisites: ECON 110B.

ECON 190. An Introduction to Research in Economics (2)
Provides students with tools to carry out their own research in economics. Tools include learning meaningful information sources, including economics datasets and literature databases. Develops the skills to write key sections of an academic article in economics, such as a section including results or a section connecting a research idea to the existing literature. Prerequisites: ECON 100A and ECE 109 or ECON 120A or MATH 181A or MATH 186 or MATH 183 or MAE 108 or MATH 180A.

ECON 191A. Senior Essay Seminar A in Economics (4)
Senior essay seminar for students with superior records in department majors. Students must complete ECON 191A and ECON 191B in consecutive quarters. Prerequisites: department stamp required.

ECON 191B. Senior Essay Seminar B in Economics (4)
Senior essay seminar for students with superior records in department majors. Students must complete ECON 191A and ECON 191B in consecutive quarters. Prerequisites: department stamp required.

ECON 195. Introduction to Teaching Economics (4)
Introduction to teaching economics. Each student will be responsible for a class section in one of the lower-division economics courses. Limited to advanced economics majors with at least a 3.5 GPA in upper-division economics work. (P/NP grades only.) Students may not earn more than eight units credit in 195 courses. Prerequisites: consent of the department.

ECON 198. Directed Group Study in Economics (2 or 4)
Directed study on a topic or in a group field not included in regular department curriculum by special arrangement with a faculty member. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and consent of instructor. May be repeated up to three times when course topics vary. (P/NP grades only.)

ECON 199. Independent Study in Economics (2 or 4)
Independent reading or research under the direction of and by special arrangement with a Department of Economics faculty member. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of instructor and department approval.

EDS 20S. Introduction to Principles of Learning (4)
Students will study discipline-specific principles of effective learning, including critical thinking, problem solving, collaboration, and group communication. Laboratory and hypothesis testing, library research and writing skills, and self-assessment. Students will explore concepts and procedures in mathematics, science, and economics. Prerequisites: Summer Bridge participation. Department approval required.

EDS 21S. Writing and Learning—Triton Transition (4)
Reading, writing, and speaking exercises will introduce students to the teaching conventions and learning expectations of American universities. Students will use writing as a means of academic inquiry to explore the culture of higher education in the United States and will gain practice with appropriate style, structure, and mechanics. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: department approval required.

EDS 22. Education in Cuba: Institutional Structures, History, and Culture (2)
Cuba’s educational system achieves higher outcomes than any other country in Latin America, and compared to the United States, it represents a very different institutional structure. Cuban education serves as an explicit vehicle for the transmission of Cuban culture and historical consciousness. This course examines Cuba’s emphasis on educational achievement following the triumph of its revolution in 1959, including institutional structures, pedagogy, and content. Prerequisites: Summer Bridge participation, instructor approval required.

EDS 22S. Education in Cuba—Field Experience (4)
This course provides a combination of seminar work and intensive field experience after the end of the spring quarter, during special summer session. Topics are introduced and analyzed in seminars and reinforced and expanded upon in field visits to historic and cultural sites in Cuba. Additional fees may be required for travel expenses. Prerequisites: students must be participants in the OASIS Learning Communities Program. Enrollment by instructor approval only. Due to expenses of field experience, enrollment will be limited to students who have completed EDS 22 and attended planning meetings with the instructor to discuss cost and travel requirements.

EDS 23. Success and Satisfaction in the Second Year of Higher Education: Research Trends and Conclusions (2)
Course focuses on challenges that confront college students in their second year of higher education and solutions. Emphasis on historically underrepresented students of color with more complex adjustment to college. Analysis of national trends from research including High Impact Practices. This course includes the essential role of utilizing undergraduate tutors to help foster academic and social community within the context of higher education. Prerequisites: department approval required. This course is a collaboration with Student Affairs “2 Excel Program.” Enrollees should only be program participants.

EDS 24. Thriving in College (2)
This course will introduce students to campus systems that are critical for their success and will provide them with the opportunity to learn about how to make the most out of their college experience. Prerequisites: department/instructor approval required. This course is intended for first-year students who completed OASIS Summer Bridge Program.

EDS 25. American Higher Education and the Collegiate Experience (4)
This course is designed to help students think critically about multicultural issues in higher education, as well as the purpose of higher education within the larger context of society. Topics include American higher education history, organization, policy, curricula, and access.

EDS 31/CHEM 96. Introduction to Teaching Science (2)
Explores routine challenges and exceptional difficulties students often have in learning science. Prepares students to make meaningful observations of how K–12 teachers deal with difficulties. Explores strategies that teachers may use to pose problems that stimulate students’ intellectual curiosity.

EDS 38. Explorations in Education (2)
Undergraduate students are placed in local schools and other educational settings within the community. Students work on educational activities with K–12 students a minimum of twenty hours/quarter. If taken for the EDS major, must be taken for a letter grade. Prerequisites: department approval required.

EDS 39. Explorations in Secondary STEM Education (2)
Undergraduate students explore current practices and issues in public education focusing on STEM secondary education (grades 6–12) through readings, guest speakers, seminars, and observations in math, science, and computer science classrooms at local schools. Prerequisites: department approval required.

EDS 50. Chancellor’s Associates Scholars Program First-year Student Introductory Course (1)
This course facilitates academic success at a leading research university by helping students understand and embrace academic and curricular expectations, engage and map cocurricular opportunities, and strengthen critical thinking, organizational, interpersonal, and wellness skills. Prerequisites: Open to Chancellor’s Associates Scholars Program first-year students only.

EDS 87. First-year Student Seminar in Education Studies (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. Topics vary from quarter to quarter. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: Enrollment priority will be given to first-year students.

EDS 102. Introduction to Qualitative Methods in Education Research (4)
Introductory course addressing topics in qualitative research method and analytic approaches, including methods such as case studies, video analysis, interviews, observations, and ethnography. Concepts explore the practice and philosophical underpinnings of specified qualitative research approach and examples of qualitative studies. If taken for EDS major, must be taken for a letter grade. Prerequisites: ED25 major and upper-division standing.

EDS 103. Introduction to Quantitative Methods in Education Research (4)
Introduction to quantitative fundamentals of statistical inference in education research. Emphasis on applying statistical concepts, selecting appropriate techniques, using techniques, and examining assumptions to interpret analytic results and summarize findings. Hands-on practice will be integral to the course. If taken for EDS major, must be taken for a letter grade. Prerequisites: ED25 major and upper-division standing.

EDS 105/PHYS 180. Teaching and Learning Physics (4)
How people learn and understand key concepts in physics. Readings in physics, physics education research, and cognitive science. Useful for students interested in teaching and learning physical sciences. Prerequisites: PHYS 1A or PHYS 2A or PHYS 4A and PHYS 1B or PHYS 2B or PHYS 4C and PHYS 1C or PHYS 2C or PHYS 2D or PHYS 4B.

EDS 108GS. Culture, Cognition, and Schooling in the Americas (4)
This seminar examines sociocultural approaches to cognitive development, with emphasis on how indigenous communities of the Americas engage in caregiving and educating young children. Cognitive development and learning theories will be explored from infancy through adolescence within cultural contexts of the Americas. Connections will be made to ways to transform public education in the United States. The course will integrate field experiences in Ecuador and individual experiences of students. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and department approval. Students must apply and be accepted to the Global Seminar Program in order to enroll.

EDS 110R. Early Learning Environments for Diverse Learners (4)
In this online course, students examine the diverse contexts in which children develop. They will explore theories of child development and how they intersect with traditional learning theories. From these foundational concepts we will explore how to develop lessons and learning activities to support the needs of diverse learners. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

EDS 111. Child, Family, and Community Partnerships with Schools (4)
This course examines how early education programs collaborate with socioculturally diverse families to support child development. Theories will examine social learning, family socialization, risk and resilience, and community engagement and how these theories are enacted in schools, communities, and families. Course assignments will support undergraduates to utilize families’ beliefs, strengths, and resources to support children’s learning with opportunities to engage with them. Students may not receive credit for both EDS 111 and EDS 111GS. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

EDS 111GS. Child, Family, and Community Partnerships with Schools (4)
This course examines how early education programs collaborate with socioculturally diverse families to support child development. Theories will examine social learning, family socialization, risk and resilience, and community engagement and how these theories are enacted in schools, communities, and families. This course is offered in Quito, Ecuador. It will integrate field experiences from excursions and individual student experiences. Program or materials fees may apply. Students may not receive credit for both EDS 111GS and EDS 111. Prerequisites: department approval. Students must apply and be accepted to the Global Seminar Program in order to enroll.

EDS 112. Urban Education in the United States (4)
Students will read, discuss, and analyze past and present urban education demographics, resources, policies, practices, and outcomes to deepen their knowledge and critique of issues in urban education. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

EDS 113. Chicanas/os and Latinos in Education: Policy, Practice, and Challenges to Equity (4)
An overview of the experiences, challenges, and opportunities for educating Chicano/Latino students. This course unpacks the socioeconomic and systematic factors that underlie these data. Further, to understand this persistent phenomenon and explore approaches to altering the current pathway of this group, this course will provide a comprehensive overview of Chicana/o-Latina/o students at every state in the P–20 education continuum. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

EDS 114. Cognitive Development and Interactive Computing Environments (4)
Development and learning are increasingly supported by interactive computing environments. This course will explore technology-supported learning environments, looking at the ways they can be used to promote effective development, learning, and teaching. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

EDS 115. Cognitive Development and Education (4)
This course examines the development of cognition, thinking, and language from infancy to adolescence with implications for education. Topics include learning theories, executive function, memory and language, as well as impacts of technology, poverty, diversity, and bilingualism. Course content focuses on addressing achievement gaps. Students may not receive credit for both EDS 115 and EDS 115GS. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate majors ED 78 or ED 76 standing or consent of instructor.

EDS 115GS. Cognitive Development and Education (4)
This course examines the development of cognition, thinking, and language from infancy to adolescence with implications for education. Topics include learning theories, executive function, memory and language, as well as impacts of technology, poverty, diversity, and bilingualism. Course content focuses on addressing achievement gaps. This course is offered in Quito, Ecuador. It will integrate field experiences gained through organized class excursions and individual experiences of students. Program or materials fees may apply. Students may not receive credit for both EDS 115GS and EDS 115. Prerequisites: department approval. Students must apply and be accepted to the Global Seminar Program in order to enroll.

EDS 116. Equity-Minded Education (4)
This course introduces the foundational historical and theoretical issues for the critical study of higher education diversity work and student affairs. This course integrates questions of identity with those of social justice and requires a strong commitment to understanding self and other. The role of mentoring, advising, and counseling will also be examined. Prerequisites: department approval (consent of instructor) required.

EDS 117. Language, Culture, and Education (4)
(Same as SOCI 117) The mutual influence of language, culture, and education will be explored; explanations of students’ school successes and failures that employ linguistic and cultural variables will be considered; bilingualism and cultural transmission through education. Students may not receive credit for EDS 117 and SOCI 117 and EDS 117GS. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

EDS 117GS. Language, Culture, and Education (4)
The mutual influence of language, culture, and education will be explored; explanations of students’ school successes and failures that employ linguistic and cultural variables will be considered; bilingualism and cultural transmission through education. This course is offered in Quito, Ecuador. It will integrate field experiences gained through organized class excursions and individual experiences of students. Program or materials fees may apply. Students may not receive credit for EDS 117GS and EDS 117 and SOCI 117. Prerequisites: department approval. Students must apply and be accepted to the Global Seminar Program in order to enroll.

EDS 118. Adolescent Development and Education (4)
This course introduces prospective secondary teachers to the cognitive, social, and emotional development of adolescents, including developmental learning theory, the teaching/learning process, effective learning environments, and cross-cultural variation in development. Implications for classroom practice are drawn.

EDS/LIGN 119. First and Second Language Learning: From Childhood through Adolescence (4)
An examination of how human language learning ability develops and changes over the first two decades of life, including discussion of factors that may affect this ability. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

EDS 120. Introduction to Design-Based Educational Research: A Field Experience for Improving San Diego Schools (4)
The course engages students in field research aimed at supporting education reform efforts in local schools. Students are introduced to a design-based, applied orientation to educational research on equity and diversity. In collaboration with local school leaders, students conduct qualitative research projects on a range of issues that impact youth in schools. Students will examine research on educational equity, theories of education reform, and qualitative research principles and methods. Students are required to travel to school sites. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and HIUS 180 or HIUS 136 or HITO 156 or HITO 136 or EDS 126 or EDS 136 or USP 129 or SOCI 139 or SOCI 127 or SOCI 126 or POLI 108 or POLI 100Q or POLI 100O or POLI 100H or LTCS 130 or HILD 7C or HILD 7B or HILD 7A or ETHN 3 or ETHN 2 or ANTH 131 or ANTH 21 or ANTH 23 or DOC 1 or DOC 100D or EDS 112 or EDS 113 or EDS 117 or SOCI 117 or EDS 125.

EDS 122/CHEM 187. Foundations of Teaching and Learning Science (4)
Examine theories of learning and how they are important in the science classroom. Conceptual development in the individual student, as well as the development of knowledge in the history of science. Key conceptual obstacles in science will be explored. Prerequisites: EDS 31/CHEM 87: Introduction to Teaching Science, Chemistry 6C.

EDS 123/CHEM 188. Capstone Seminar in Science Education (4)
In the lecture and observation format, students continue to explore the theories of learning in the science classroom. Conceptual development is fostered, as well as continued development of knowledge of science history. Students are exposed to the science of teaching science in actual practice. Prerequisites: EDS 122/CHEM 187.

EDS 124AR. Teaching Computation in the Digital World (4)
This online course develops educators’ knowledge base around aspects of the Digital World (e.g., digital devices, systems, networks; data and analysis) and their impacts (social, ethical, legal issues) and contributions to society. Projects introduce novice programming framework(s) and/or other online interfaces to explore and model issues. Prior programming experience is not required. This course is a distance education course. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

EDS 124BR. Teaching Computational Thinking for Everyone (4)
Examine issues in computing education (e.g., access and equity). Conceptual and skill development with core programming concepts (flow of control, abstraction, algorithms) using a novice programming framework. Computer science teaching and assessment methods for deep understanding. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

EDS 125. History, Politics, and Theory of Bilingual Education (4)
This course provides a historical overview and models of bilingual education in the United States. Students will examine sociocultural, theoretical, and policy issues associated with native language and second-language instruction, and legal requirements for public bilingual program.

EDS 126. Social Organization of Education (4)
(Same as SOCI 126) The social organization of education in the United States and other societies; the functions of education for individuals and society; the structure of schools; educational decision making; educational testing; socialization and education; formal and informal education; cultural transmission. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

EDS 127. Education Policy in the United States (4)
An introduction to current education policy issues in the United States. Students will critically examine policies at the federal, state, and local levels, investigate the relationship between education policy, social context, and inequality, and develop skills to recommend policy changes and implementation strategies. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

EDS 128 A-B. Introduction to Teaching and Learning (Elementary) (4-4)
This course series is for undergraduates who are exploring a career in elementary school teaching. Topics addressed include theories of teaching and learning; research on cognition and motivation; and the cultural context of classroom teaching and learning. EDS 128A focuses on the learner in the teaching-learning interaction and EDS 128B focuses on the teacher in the teaching-learning interaction. Prerequisites: department approval required; EDS 139 must be taken as corequisite. EDS 130 or 131 or 133 or 135 or 136 or 137 or 145 or 146 must be completed before EDS 128A, and 128A for 128B. EDS 128A and EDS 128B are restricted for students applying to the EDS MEd/Multiple Subject Credential Program.

EDS 129 A-B-C. Introduction to Teaching and Learning (Secondary) (4-4-4)
This course series is for undergraduates who are exploring a career in teaching secondary school. Topics addressed include theories of teaching and learning processes and motivation for science, mathematics, English, and world language instruction. EDS 129A focuses on the analysis of the needs of individual learners and small group instruction techniques; EDS 129B emphasizes the various roles of the classroom teacher and planning individual lessons; and EDS 129C emphasizes the assessment of student work and longer-range curriculum planning. Prerequisites: department approval required; EDS 139 must be taken as corequisite. Must have successfully completed EDS 135, 136, or 129A for 129B, and 129B for 129C. EDS 129B and 129C are restricted for students applying to the EDS MEd/Single Subject Credential Program.

EDS 130. Introduction to Academic Mentoring of Elementary/School Students (4)
This course focuses on the role of undergraduate mentors in raising academic expectations for students and families traditionally underrepresented at the university. The relationship between the school and community, the social and political organization of elementary schools, and the academic achievement of elementary children are examined. Prerequisites: department approval required; EDS 139 must be taken as a corequisite.

EDS 131. Early Childhood Development and Education (4)
This course investigates early child development (birth through eight years) and education and the role of high-quality early education on reducing inequities among diverse populations. Field experience and seminar focus on applying research and theory to experiences in early childhood classrooms (P–3). Prerequisites: department approval. Students will need to fill out a placement form prior to getting approval to enroll in EDS 131. This form provides the course instructor with information to make the appropriate field placement; EDS 139 must be taken as a corequisite.

EDS 133. Counseling, Mentoring, and Academic Advising (Preschool through Twelfth Grade) (4)
This course introduces students to foundations of academic advising and counseling. Through a combination of course readings, assignments, lectures, guest speakers, and field experiences, students learn about a social justice approach to academic advising and counseling. The course addresses issues of diversity, equity, access, and inclusion in P–12 schools. The role of language and culture, as well as family and community factors are addressed. Prerequisites: department approval required. EDS 139 must be taken as a corequisite.

EDS 135. Working with Newcomer Communities in San Diego (6)
This Partners at Learning (PAL) practicum course examines the history, policies, and practices that inform work with newcomers (recent refugees and immigrants) in the San Diego community. Students enrolled in the course will learn about the diverse groups of newcomers in San Diego and will complete their field hours in a variety of school and community settings. Prerequisites: department approval required.

EDS 136. Introduction to Academic Tutoring of Secondary School Students (4)
This course focuses on the role of undergraduate tutors in building academic resiliency in secondary students traditionally underrepresented at the university. The relationship between the school and community, the social and political organization of secondary schools, the philosophical, sociological, and political issues which relate to the US secondary educational system, and the academic achievement of secondary children are examined. Prerequisites: department approval required; EDS 139 must be taken as a corequisite.

EDS 137. Introduction to Discipline-Specific Teaching and Learning (4)
This course examines effective practices for teaching and learning in specific academic content areas in PreK–12 school or community settings. The field experience and seminar focus on relationship building between mentors and learners, discipline-relevant teaching and learning processes, and community service. Prerequisites: department approval required; EDS 139 must be taken as a corequisite.

EDS 139. Practicum in Teaching and Learning (2)
Students are placed in local P–12 schools and community field sites to actively engage in face-to-face educational service work. Students spend a minimum of four hours per week consistently over the ten-week quarter for a minimum total of forty hours per quarter. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit up to twelve times. Corequisites: One of the following courses must be taken concurrently: EDS 128A-B, or 129A-B-C, 130, 131, 133, 136, 137, 140, 141, 145, or 146. Prerequisites: department approval required.

EDS 140. Introduction to Action Research in P–12 Schools (4)
Using a service-learning model, the course provides students with the opportunity to serve as mentors and tutors at local underserved P–12 public schools and/or community centers while building the foundations of their own action research projects. Students will be introduced to qualitative research in education and taught the importance of conducting ethical and responsible research. Structured as a seminar, the course serves as a venue for students to develop their action research proposal. Prerequisites: EDS 130 or EDS 131 or EDS 133 or EDS 135 or EDS 136 or EDS 137 or EDS 145 or EDS 146, department approval. Students will need to fill out a placement form prior to getting approval to enroll in EDS 140. This form provides the course instructor with information regarding student’s prior experiences with PAL, areas/topics of interest; EDS 139 must be taken as a corequisite. If students wish to continue their service-learning practicum at their host school, they can take EDS 139.

EDS 141. Action Research in P–12 Education: Advanced Practicum in P–12 Schools and Communities (4)
Using a service-learning model, EDS 141 builds on EDS 140. Students will integrate their service-learning experiences at local P–12 public schools and/or community centers with action-oriented research experiences. In this course, students expand their understanding of qualitative and quantitative research methods in education and emphasizes the importance of carrying out research in responsible and ethical ways. Prerequisites: EDS 140, department approval. Students will need to fill out a placement form prior to getting approval to enroll in EDS 140. This form provides the course instructor with information regarding student’s prior experiences with PAL, areas/topics of interest; EDS 139 must be taken as a corequisite.

EDS 145. Artsbridge: Integrating the Arts Across the Curriculum (4)
In this course, students explore the role of the arts (dance, media arts, music, theatre, and/or visual arts) in P–12 education. A focus on STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, Mathematics), as well as the arts as a core subject, provide multiple perspectives on the arts and education. Students explore how arts activities enhance learning across the curriculum. The course explores issues of teaching, learning, creativity, communication, and social justice through the arts. Prerequisites: department approval required; EDS 139 must be taken as a corequisite.

EDS 146. Mindfulness and Education (4)
This course introduces students to mindfulness and yoga in schools as it relates to social and emotional learning (SEL), executive functioning, and academic success. Through a combination of readings, lectures/discussions, assignments, and field experiences, students will learn about the impact of contemplative practices on academic functioning and SEL, while also addressing current educational and socio-emotional challenges that P–12 students, teachers, and parents face. Prerequisites: department approval required, EDS 139 must be taken as a corequisite.

EDS 150. Chancellor’s Associates Scholars Program Transfer Introductory Course (2)
This course facilitates academic success at a leading research university by helping students understand and embrace academic and curricular expectations, engage and map cocurricular opportunities, and strengthen critical thinking, organizational, interpersonal, and wellness skills. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: open to Chancellor’s Associates Scholars Program transfer students only.

EDS 164R. Early Childhood Policy: Children, Contexts, and Policies in Diverse Societies (4)
The focus of early childhood policy is to understand how the diverse policy contexts in which children are born and raised have dramatic implications for their life trajectories. This course examines how, when, and why government intervenes in children’s lives through family, pre-/school, community, and digital media contexts, in the aim to improve their trajectories. From this basis we examine the effects of policies on children locally, nationally, and internationally. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

EDS 180. Topics in Education Studies (4)
This course examines special topics in education from a variety of theoretical and pedagogical perspectives. Topics will address pertinent and current issues related to teaching and learning, with an emphasis on transforming education in a diverse society. Topics may vary based on faculty expertise and research. May be taken for credit up to four times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

EDS 190. Research Practicum (1–6)
Supervised research studies with individual topics selected according to students’ special interests. Students will develop a research proposal and begin to gather and analyze data. Prerequisites: consent of instructor. (F,W,S)

EDS 195. Apprentice Teaching (2–4)
Advanced EDS students are prepared in effective methods of supervising the preparation of UC San Diego students serving as paraprofessionals in K–12 classrooms. Topics covered include classroom management, interpersonal relations, supervision techniques, multicultural and multilingual education, politics in the school, and curriculum development. Each student serves as a discussion leader and conducts at least two workshops. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and department approval.

EDS 198. Directed Group Study (4–2)
Directed group study, guided reading, and study involving research and analysis of activities and services in multicultural education, bilingual education, the teaching-learning process, and other areas that are not covered by the present curriculum. May be taken for credit up to ten times. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

EDS 199. Special Studies (4)
Individual guided reading and study involving research and analysis of activities and services in multicultural education, bilingual education, the teaching-learning process, and other areas that are not covered by the present curriculum. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

ERC 1. First Year Experience (2)
This course facilitates academic success at a leading research university by helping students understand and embrace academic and curricular expectations, engage and map cocurricular opportunities, and strengthen critical thinking, organizational, interpersonal, and wellness skills. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: open to ERC NFRS students only.

ERC 2. Transfer Year Experience (2)
This course facilitates academic success at a leading research university by helping students understand and embrace academic and curricular expectations, engage and map cocurricular opportunities, and strengthen critical thinking, organizational, interpersonal, and wellness skills. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: open to ERC transfer students only.

ERC 20. First-year Student Honors Seminar: International Themes (1)
This weekly seminar focuses on a chosen international theme with faculty speakers. The structure of the seminar is informal, giving students the opportunity to participate in interactive discussions. Pass/Not Pass only. May be taken for credit three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: open to students in the Eleanor Roosevelt College First-year Student Honors Program only.

ERC 89. Practicum in Math Tutoring (2)
Undergraduate students will be provided with one hour of instruction on pedagogy of tutoring math in a public high school setting and placement in regional public high schools to provide five hours of one-on-one tutoring of math students under supervision of high school math teachers. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: Math 10A or 20A. 

ERC 92. Honors Project (2)
Individual project on a topic chosen by the student, done under direction of a faculty member. Prerequisites: by invitation only. Pass/Not Pass only. Repeatable for credit twice, up to a total of six units over three quarters.

ERC 188. Transfer Seminar: The Research University (1)
This weekly seminar focuses on the skills required to write an upper-division research paper and prepare for a winter quarter internship through Academic Internship Program. The structure of the seminar is informal, giving students the opportunity to participate in interactive discussions based on required reading and faculty speakers. Prerequisites: department stamp.

ERC 192A. Global Service Research Seminar (2)
This is the first course of a two-course elective sequence (ERC 192A and ERC 192B) entitled ERC Global Service and Research. ERC 192A provides an academic introduction to the culture and history of the nation and region selected for this undergraduate academic, practicum, and research experience to prepare students for the subsequent service and research portion (ERC 192B). Note: The course is open to all students. Students must have completed course work in relevant topics, such as regional history, economics, culture. Prerequisites: department stamp.

ERC 196. Honors Project (4)
Senior thesis research project for students who have been accepted into the Eleanor Roosevelt College Individual Studies major. Project will be carried out under supervision of one or more faculty members. Depending on scope of the project, may be taken for four or eight units of credit in a single quarter, or eight units distributed over two quarters. Prerequisites: admission to Eleanor Roosevelt College Individual Studies major.

ERC 199. ERC Independent Studies (4)
The content of this independent study course, which may not duplicate any existing course on campus, will be determined by a supervising faculty member and tailored to fit specific content needs of students pursuing the Eleanor Roosevelt College Individual Studies major. Prerequisites: admission to Eleanor Roosevelt College Individual Studies major.
ENG 5. Orientation to Engineering Profession (1)
This course focuses on academic and personal/career planning, including resume development and preparation for future opportunities including research, internships, and graduate school. Students will gain knowledge and skills in these areas through assignments and in-class activities. This course is available for first-year undergraduate students in the IDEA Scholars program. Prerequisites: department approval required.

ENG 10. Fundamentals of Engineering Applications (2)
Application-oriented, hands-on introduction to engineering mathematics and design processes. Key mathematical concepts as they apply to engineering, including solving systems of equations and least-squares regression. In-class activities using Python and Arduino will complement the lectures and provide students hands-on experience with solving real-world engineering problems related to design, manufacturing and prototyping, electronics, and data analysis.

ENG 15. Engineer Your Success (2)
Engineer Your Success is designed to enhance your success as an engineering student (and later as an engineer) by developing key academic and personal skills. Learn how to study more effectively and uncover how to become the best engineer you can be. This course focuses on academic and personal planning, time management, study skills, and paths to personal growth. Activities include individual and collaborative exercises, personal reflections, and a final project.

ENG 20. Introduction to Engineering Research (2)
Introduction to research in engineering. Topics include defining a research problem, finding and reading technical papers, technical writing, and effective practices for presenting research. Students write a proposal on their lab placement research project. This course is for students in the Guided Engineering Apprenticeship in Research (GEAR). Prerequisites: department approval required.

ENG 100C. Technical Writing/Communication for Engineers and Scientist (2)
Principles and procedures of technical writing and professional communication. The course is ideal for students pursuing careers in science and/or engineering and covers organizing information, writing for technical forms such as proposals and abstracts, and designing visual aids.

ENG 100D. Design for Development (4)
An introduction to the practice of human-centered design and team engineering within a humanitarian context. Includes a group project designing a solution for a local or global nonprofit organization. Topics include design process, contextual listening, project management, needs and capacity assessment, stakeholder analysis, ethical issues, models of leadership, gender and cultural issues, sustainable community development, and social entrepreneurship. ENG 100D is the gateway course for the Global TIES program, but it is open to all undergraduate students. Please go to http://globalties.ucsd.edu for information about Global TIES. Recommended preparation: one university-level mathematics course. Prerequisites: CAT 2 or DOC 2 or HUM 2 or MCWP 40 or MMW 2 or WCWP 10B or SYN 1.

ENG 100L. Design for Development Lab (2)
Faculty-directed, interdisciplinary, long-term humanitarian engineering, technology, and social innovation projects. Students work in teams to design, build, test, and deliver solutions to real-world problems experienced by nonprofit organizations and the communities they serve. ENG 100L is the laboratory course for the Global TIES program. Enrollment in this course is limited to students who have applied to and been accepted into the Global TIES program. Please go to http://globalties.ucsd.edu to apply to the program. May be taken for credit six times. Prerequisites: ENG 100D. Department approval required.

BENG 1. Introduction to Bioengineering (2)
An introduction to bioengineering that includes lectures and hands-on laboratory for design projects. The principles of problem definition, engineering inventiveness, team design, prototyping, and testing, as well as information access, engineering standards, communication, ethics, and social responsibility will be emphasized. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: none. (W)

BENG 2. Introductory Computer Programming and MATLAB (2)
Introduction to MATLAB is designed to give students fluency in MATLAB, including popular toolboxes. Consists of interactive lectures with a computer running MATLAB for each student. Topics: variables, operations, and plotting; visualization and programming; and solving equations and curve fitting. Prerequisites: bioengineering: biosystems majors only or consent of department. (F)

BENG 87. First-year Student Seminar (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students. (F,W,S)

BENG 91. Topics in Bioengineering and Medicine (1)
Seminar discussing the interface between and opportunities for bioengineering and medicine. Students will interact with clinical faculty and bioengineering faculty to discuss current topics and problems where engineering solutions could improve the practice of medicine. Intended for first-year and transfer students in the Department of Bioengineering. Prerequisites: bioengineering majors only or consent of department.

BENG 97. Internship/Field Studies (1–4)
An enrichment program available to a limited number of lower-division undergraduate students, which provides work experience with industry, government offices, and hospitals. The internship is coordinated through UC San Diego’s Academic Internship Program under the supervision of a faculty member and an industrial, government, or hospital employee. Prerequisites: lower-division standing, completion of thirty units of UC San Diego undergraduate study, a minimum UC San Diego GPA of 3.0, and a completed and approved Special Studies form. (F,W,S)

BENG 98. Directed Group Study (1–4)
Directed group study on a topic or in a field not included in the regular department curriculum. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: lower-division standing, completion of thirty units of undergraduate study at UC San Diego with a UC San Diego GPA of at least 3.0 and consent of a bioengineering faculty member; completed and approved Special Studies form.

BENG 99. Independent Study for Undergraduates in Bioengineering (4)
Independent reading or research by arrangement with a bioengineering faculty member. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: lower-division standing, completion of thirty units of undergraduate study at UC San Diego with a UC San Diego GPA of at least 3.0 and consent of a bioengineering faculty member; completed and approved Special Studies form.

BENG 99H. Independent Study in Bioengineering (1)
Independent study or research under direction of a member of the faculty. Prerequisites: student must be of first-year standing and a Regents Scholar; approved Special Studies form.

BENG 100. Introduction to Probability and Statistics for Bioengineers (4)
The class provides foundation in probability and statistics. Topics include probability spaces, random variables, independence, common distributions, CLT, estimator accuracy, maximum likelihood, and hypothesis testing. Written problems are provided for each topic. Applications are discussed in regard to bioengineering problems. Prerequisites: BENG 1, MATH 18 or MATH 31AH or MATH 20F, MATH 20C or MATH 31BH; bioengineering majors only or consent of department. (S)

BENG 102. Molecular Components of Living Systems (4)
Introduction to molecular structures. Macromolecules and assemblies-proteins, nucleic acids, and metabolites. Principles of design of simple and complex components of organelles, cells, and tissues. Prerequisites: BENG 120 or consent of department. (S)

BENG 103B. Bioengineering Mass Transfer (4)
Mass transfer in solids, liquids, and gases with application to biological systems. Free and facilitated diffusion. Convective mass transfer. Diffusion-reaction phenomena. Active transport. Biological mass transfer coefficients. Steady and unsteady state. Flux-force relationships. (Credit not allowed for both CENG 101C and BENG 103B.) Prerequisites: CENG 101A or MAE 101A or BENG 112A, or consent of department. (S)

BENG 110. Musculoskeletal Biomechanics (4)
Statics, dynamics, and solid mechanics of hard and soft musculoskeletal tissues. Forces, moments, static equilibrium, kinematics, kinetics applied to human mechanics, and movement. Stress, strain, and material properties of musculoskeletal tissues. Problem solving and design in biomechanics. Prerequisites: MATH 20D, MATH 20E or MATH 31CH, MATH 18 or MATH 31AH; PHYS 2C, or consent of department. (F)

BENG 112A. Soft Tissue Biomechanics (4)
Tensor analysis. Stress, strain, equilibrium, and constitutive law for soft biological tissues. Applications of solid mechanics to mammalian tissue physiology. Viscoelasticity. Finite elasticity. Problem solving and design in soft tissue biomechanics. Prerequisites: BENG 110 or consent of department. (W)

BENG 112B. Fluid and Cell Biomechanics (4)
Fluid hydrostatics and flow dynamics. Flow kinematics and conservation laws applied to the circulation. Viscous biofluids. Biopolymers, cell mechanics, and mechanobiology. Problem solving and design in biofluid and cell mechanics. Prerequisites: BENG 112A or consent of department. (S)

BENG 119A. Design Development in Biomechanics (3)
Development of design project in biomechanics. Prerequisites: concurrent enrollment in BENG 187B; bioengineering or bioengineering: biotechnology majors only or consent of instructor. (F)

BENG 119B. Design Implementation in Biomechanics (3)
Implementation of design project in biomechanics. Prerequisites: concurrent enrollment in BENG 187C; bioengineering or bioengineering: biotechnology majors only or consent of instructor. (W)

BENG 120. Organic Chemistry Structural and Design Principles (4)
Structural and design principles of carbon compounds. Structure and stereochemistry. Functional groups and chemical transformations. Structure and design principles of biomolecules. Molecules of life and their organization. Prerequisites: CHEM 6A and 6B; majors only or consent of department. (W)

BENG 122A. Biosystems and Control (4)
Systems and control theory applied to bioengineering. Modeling, linearization, transfer functions, Laplace transforms, closed-loop systems, design and simulation of controllers. Dynamic behavior and controls of first and second order processes. PID controllers. Stability. Bode design. Features of biological controls systems. A simulation project using MATLAB and an oral presentation are required. Credit not allowed for both ECE 101 and BENG 122A. Prerequisites: MAE 140 or BENG 134 or consent of department. (F)

BENG 123. Dynamic Simulation in Bioengineering (4)
Dynamic simulation of biochemical reaction networks, including reconstruction of networks, mathematical description of kinetics of biochemical reactions, dynamic simulation of systems of biochemical reactions, and use of simulators for data interpretation and prediction in biology. Emphasis on a design project. Prerequisites: MATH 18 or MATH 31AH, MATH 20D, BENG 120, or CHEM 40B; majors only or consent of department. (W)

BENG 125. Modeling and Computation in Bioengineering (4)
Computational modeling of molecular bioengineering phenomena: excitable cells, regulatory networks, and transport. Application of ordinary, stochastic, and partial differential equations. Introduction to data analysis techniques: power spectra, wavelets, and nonlinear time series analysis. Prerequisites: BENG 122A or BENG 123 or consent of department. (S)

BENG 126A. Design Development in Bioinformatics Bioengineering (3)
Development of design project in bioinformatics bioengineering. Prerequisites: concurrent enrollment in BENG 187B; bioengineering or bioengineering: biotechnology majors only or consent of instructor. (F)

BENG 126B. Design Implementation in Bioinformatics Bioengineering (3)
Implementation of design project in bioinformatics bioengineering. Prerequisites: BENG 126A; concurrent enrollment in BENG 187C; bioengineering or bioengineering: biotechnology majors only or consent of instructor. (W)

BENG 127A. Design Development in Molecular Systems Bioengineering (3)
Development of design project in molecular systems bioengineering. Prerequisites: concurrent enrollment in BENG 187B; bioengineering or bioengineering: biotechnology majors only or consent of instructor. (F)

BENG 127B. Design Implementation in Molecular Systems Bioengineering (3)
Implementation of design project in molecular systems bioengineering. Prerequisites: BENG 127A; concurrent enrollment in BENG 187C; bioengineering or bioengineering: biotechnology majors only or consent of instructor. (W)

BENG 128A. Design Development in Genetic Circuits Bioengineering (3)
Development of design project in genetic circuits bioengineering. Prerequisites: concurrent enrollment in BENG 187B; bioengineering or bioengineering: biotechnology majors only or consent of instructor. (F)

BENG 128B. Design Implementation in Genetic Circuits Bioengineering (3)
Implementation of design project in genetic circuits bioengineering. Prerequisites: BENG 128A; concurrent enrollment in BENG 187C; bioengineering or bioengineering: biotechnology majors only or consent of instructor. (W)

BENG 129A. Design Development in Cell Systems Bioengineering (3)
Development of design project in cell systems bioengineering. Prerequisites: concurrent enrollment in BENG 187B; bioengineering or bioengineering: biotechnology majors only or consent of instructor. (F)

BENG 129B. Design Implementation in Cell Systems Bioengineering (3)
Implementation of design project in cell systems bioengineering. Prerequisites: BENG 129A; concurrent enrollment in BENG 187C; bioengineering or bioengineering: biotechnology majors only or consent of instructor. (W)

BENG 130. Biotechnology Thermodynamics and Kinetics (4)
An introduction to physical principles that govern biological matter and processes, with engineering examples. Thermodynamic principles, structural basis of life, molecular reactions and kinetics, and models to illustrate biological phenomena. Prerequisites: CHEM 6B, MATH 20A, 20B, 20D, PHYS 2A, 2B, 2C; majors only or consent of department. (W)

BENG 133. Numerical Analysis and Computational Engineering (4)
Principles of digital computing, including number representation and arithmetic operations. Accuracy, stability, and convergence. Algorithms for solving linear systems of equations, interpolation, numerical differentiation, and integration and ordinary differential equations. Prerequisites: MATH 20D and 18 or consent of department. (S)

BENG 134. Measurements, Statistics, and Probability (4)
A combined lecture and laboratory course that provides an introductory treatment of probability theory, including distribution functions, moments, and random variables. Practical applications include estimation of means and variances, hypothesis testing, sampling theory, and linear regression. Prerequisites: MATH 20D and MATH 18 or MATH 31AH; BENG 100 or consent of department. (F)

BENG 135. Biomedical Signals and Systems (4)
Discrete systems: linearity, convolution, impulse, and step responses. Linear systems properties. Difference equations. Fourier Series. Continuous FS. Discrete FS. Periodic signals, filtering, and FT. Discrete FT examples. Frequency response of linear systems. Sampling. Relationship between FT, DFT. Laplace Transform. LT and inverse LT. Prerequisites: ECE 45 and BENG 133 or consent of department. (F) Not offered until fall 2016.

BENG 139A. Design Development in Molecular Bioengineering (3)
Development of design project in molecular bioengineering. Prerequisites: concurrent enrollment in BENG 187B; bioengineering or bioengineering: biotechnology majors only or consent of instructor. (F)

BENG 139B. Design Implementation in Molecular Bioengineering (3)
Implementation of design project in molecular bioengineering. Prerequisites: BENG 139A; concurrent enrollment in BENG 187C; bioengineering or bioengineering: biotechnology majors only or consent of instructor. (W)

BENG 140A. Bioengineering Physiology (4)
Introductory mammalian physiology for bioengineering students, with emphasis on control mechanisms and engineering principles. Basic cell functions; biological control systems; muscle; neural; endocrine, and circulatory systems. Not intended for premedical bioengineering students. Credit not allowed for both BIPN 100 and BENG 140A. Prerequisites: CHEM 6A-B, PHYS 2A-B-C, BILD 1, or BENG 102; majors only or consent of department. (W)

BENG 140B. Bioengineering Physiology (4)
Introductory mammalian physiology for bioengineering students, with emphasis on control mechanisms and engineering principles. Digestive, respiratory, renal, and reproductive systems; regulation of metabolism, and defense mechanisms. (Credit not allowed for both BIPN 102 and BENG 140B.) Prerequisites: BENG 140A; majors only or consent of instructor. (S)

BENG 141. Biomedical Optics and Imaging (4)
Introduction to optics. Light propagation in tissue. Propagation modeling. Optical components. Laser concepts. Optical coherence tomography. Microscopic scattering. Tissue optics. Microscopy. Confocal microscopy. Polarization in tissue. Absorption, diffuse reflection, light scattering spectroscopy. Raman, fluorescence lifetime imaging. Photo-acoustic imaging. Prerequisites: BENG 100 or consent of department. (F)

BENG 147A. Design Development in Neural Engineering (3)
Development of design project in neural engineering. Prerequisites: concurrent enrollment in BENG 187B; bioengineering or bioengineering: biotechnology majors only or consent of instructor. (F)

BENG 147B. Design Implementation in Neural Engineering (3)
Implementation of design project in neural engineering. Prerequisites: BENG 147A; concurrent enrollment in BENG 187C; bioengineering or bioengineering: biotechnology majors only or consent of instructor. (W)

BENG 148A. Design Development in Cardiac Bioengineering (3)
Development of design project in cardiac bioengineering. Prerequisites: concurrent enrollment in BENG 187B; bioengineering or bioengineering: biotechnology majors only or consent of instructor. (F)

BENG 148B. Design Implementation in Cardiac Bioengineering (3)
Implementation of design project in cardiac bioengineering. Prerequisites: BENG 148A; concurrent enrollment in BENG 187C; bioengineering or bioengineering: biotechnology majors only or consent of instructor. (W)

BENG 149A. Design Development in Vascular Bioengineering (3)
Development of design project in vascular bioengineering. Prerequisites: concurrent enrollment in BENG 187B; bioengineering or bioengineering: biotechnology majors only or consent of instructor. (F)

BENG 149B. Design Implementation in Vascular Bioengineering (3)
Implementation of design project in vascular bioengineering. Prerequisites: BENG 149A; concurrent enrollment in BENG 187C; bioengineering or bioengineering: biotechnology majors only or consent of instructor. (W)

BENG 152. Biosystems Engineering Laboratory (4)
Experimental study of real and simulated systems and their controls (examples will include electrical, biological, and biomechanical systems). Projects consist of identification, input-output analysis, design, and implementation of analog controls. Laboratory examples will include electrical circuit design and analysis, analysis of living tissues such as bone, analysis and manipulation of cells (bacteria in chemostat). Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: BENG 102; bioengineering: biosystems majors only or consent of department. (W)

BENG 160. Chemical and Molecular Bioengineering Techniques (4)
Introductory laboratory course in current principles and techniques of chemistry and molecular biology applicable to bioengineering. Quantitation of proteins and nucleic acids by spectrophotometric, immunological, and enzymatic methods. Separations and purification by centrifugation, chromatographic, and electrophoretic methods. Course materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: BICD 100, BENG 100, MAE 170; majors only or consent of department. (S)

BENG 161A. Bioreactor Engineering (4)
Engineering, biochemical, and physiological considerations in the design of bioreactor processes: enzyme kinetics, mass transfer limitations, microbial growth, and product formation kinetics. Fermentation reactor selection, design, scale-up, control. Quantitative bioengineering analysis and design of biochemical processes and experiments on biomolecules. Prerequisites: BENG 123 and BENG 160 or consent of department. (F)

BENG 161B. Biochemical Engineering (4)
Commercial production of biochemical commodity products. Application of genetic control systems and mutant populations. Recombinant DNA and eukaryotic proteins in E. coli and other host organisms. Product recovery operations, including the design of bioseparation processes of filtration, adsorption, chromatography, and crystallization. Bioprocess economics. Human recombinant erythropoietin as an example, from genomic cloning to CHO cell expression, to bioreactor manufacturing and purification of medical products for clinical application. Prerequisites: BENG 161A or consent of department. (W)

BENG 162. Biotechnology Laboratory (4)
Laboratory practices and design principles for biotechnology. Culture of microorganisms and mammalian cells, recombinant DNA bioreactor design and operation. Design and implementation of biosensors. A team design-based term project and oral presentation required. Course materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: MAE 170 and BENG 160; majors only or consent of department. (F)

BENG 166A. Cell and Tissue Engineering (4)
Engineering analysis of physico-chemical rate processes that affect, limit, and govern the function of cells and tissues. Cell migration, mitosis, apoptosis, and differentiation. Dynamic and structural interactions between mesenchyme and parenchyme. The role of the tissue microenvironment including cell-cell interactions, extracellular matrix, and growth factor communication. The design of functional tissue substitutes including cell and material sourcing, scale-up and manufacturability, efficacy and safety, regulatory, and ethical topics. Clinical applications. Prerequisites: BENG 103B or BENG 112B; senior standing or consent of department. (F)

BENG 168. Biomolecular Engineering (4)
Basic molecular biology and recombinant DNA technologies. Structure and function of biomolecules that decode genomes and perform energy conversion, enzymatic catalysis, and active transport. Metabolism of macromolecules. Molecular diagnostics. Design, engineering, and manufacture of proteins, genomes, cells, and biomolecular therapies. Prerequisites: BILD 1 and BENG 100, or consent of department. (W)

BENG 169A. Design Development in Tissue Engineering (3)
Development of design project in tissue engineering. Prerequisites: concurrent enrollment in BENG 187B; bioengineering or bioengineering: biotechnology majors only or consent of instructor. (F)

BENG 169B. Design Implementation in Tissue Engineering (3)
Implementation of design project in tissue engineering. Prerequisites: BENG 169A; concurrent enrollment in BENG 187C; bioengineering or bioengineering: biotechnology majors only or consent of instructor. (W)

BENG 172. Bioengineering Laboratory (4)
A laboratory course demonstrating basic concepts of biomechanics, bioengineering design, and experimental procedures involving animal tissue. Sources of error and experimental limitations. Computer data acquisition, modeling, statistical analysis. Experiments on artery, muscle and heart mechanics, action potentials, viscoelasticity, electrocardiography, hemorheology. Course materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: MAE 170; junior or senior standing in the major or consent of instructor. (S)

BENG 179A. Design Development in Bioinstrumentation (3)
Development of design project in bioinstrumentation. Prerequisites: concurrent enrollment in BENG 187B; bioengineering or bioengineering: biotechnology majors only or consent of instructor. (F)

BENG 179B. Design Implementation in Bioinstrumentation (3)
Implementation of design project in bioinstrumentation. Prerequisites: BENG 179A; concurrent enrollment in BENG 187C; bioengineering or bioengineering: biotechnology majors only or consent of instructor. (W)

BENG/BIMM/CSE 181. Molecular Sequence Analysis (4)
(Cross-listed as BIMM 181 and CSE 181.) This course covers the analysis of nucleic acid and protein sequences, with an emphasis on the application of algorithms to biological problems. Topics include sequence alignments, database searching, comparative genomics, and phylogenetic and clustering analyses. Pairwise alignment, multiple alignment, DNA sequencing, scoring functions, fast database search, comparative genomics, clustering, phylogenetic trees, gene finding/DNA statistics. Prerequisites: CSE 100; CSE 101; BIMM 100 or CHEM 114C; bioinformatics majors only. (W)

BENG/BIMM/CSE/CHEM 182. Biological Databases (4)
(Cross-listed as BIMM 182, CSE 182, and CHEM 182.) This course provides an introduction to the features of biological data, how those data are organized efficiently in databases, and how existing data resources can be utilized to solve a variety of biological problems. Object-oriented databases, data modeling, and data description. Survey of current biological database with respect to above; implementation of database focused on a biological topic. Prerequisites: CSE 100; bioinformatics majors only. (S)

BENG 183. Applied Genomic Technologies (4)
Principles and technologies for using genomic information for biomedical applications. Technologies will be introduced progressively, from DNA to RNA to protein to whole cell systems. The integration of biology, chemistry, engineering, and computation will be stressed. Topics include technology for the genome, DNA chips, RNA technologies, proteomic technologies, aphysiomic and phenomic technologies, and analysis of cell function. Prerequisites: BIMM 100 or CHEM 114C, or consent of department. (F)

BENG/BIMM/CSE/CHEM 184. Computational Molecular Biology (4)
(Cross-listed as BIMM 184, CSE 184, and CHEM 184.) This advanced course covers the application of machine learning and modeling techniques to biological systems. Topics include gene structure, recognition of DNA and protein sequence patterns, classification, and protein structure prediction. Pattern discovery, hidden Markov models/support vector machines/neural network/profiles, protein structure prediction, functional characterization of proteins, functional genomics/proteomics, metabolic pathways/gene networks. Prerequisites: BENG 181 or BIMM 181 or CSE 181; BENG 182 or BIMM 182 or CSE 182 or CHEM 182; bioinformatics majors only. (S)

BENG 186A. Principles of Biomaterials Design (4)
Fundamentals of materials science as applied to bioengineering design. Natural and synthetic polymeric materials. Materials characterization and design. Wound repair, blood clotting, foreign body response, transplantation biology, biocompatibility of materials, tissue engineering. Artificial organs and medical devices. Government regulations. Patenting. Economic impact. Ethical issues. A term project and oral presentation are required. Prerequisites: BENG 112B or BENG 123, or consent of department. (S)

BENG 186B. Principles of Bioinstrumentation Design (4)
Biophysical phenomena, transducers, and electronics as related to the design of biomedical instrumentation. Potentiometric and amperometric signals and amplifiers. Biopotentials, membrane potentials, chemical sensors. Electrical safety. Mechanical transducers for displacement, force, and pressure. Temperature sensors. Flow sensors. Light-based instrumentation. Prerequisites: ECE 35 or MAE 140; ECE 45 or MAE 170; or consent of department. (W)

BENG 187A. Bioengineering Design Project: Planning (1)
General engineering design topics including project planning and design objectives, background research, engineering needs assessment, technical design specifications, engineering standards, and design requirements and constraints. Introduction to biomedical and biotechnology design projects. Career and professional advising. Majors must enroll in the course for a letter grade in order to count the sequence toward the major. No exceptions will be approved. Prerequisites: BENG 112A or BENG 152 or BENG 168; bioengineering, bioengineering: biotechnology, or bioengineering: biosystems majors only or consent of department. (S)

BENG 187B. Bioengineering Design Project: Development (1)
Development of an original bioengineering design for solution of a problem in biology or medicine. Analysis of economic issues, manufacturing and quality assurance, ethics, safety, design constraints, government regulations, and patent requirements. Oral presentation and formal engineering reports. Career and professional advising. Majors must enroll in the course for a letter grade in order to count the sequence toward the major. No exceptions will be approved. Prerequisites: BENG 187A; concurrent enrollment in one of BENG 119A, BENG 126A, BENG 127A, BENG 128A, BENG 129A, BENG 139A, BENG 147A, BENG 148A, BENG 149A, BENG 169A, or BENG 179A; bioengineering, bioengineering: biotechnology, or bioengineering: biosystems majors only or consent of instructor. (F)

BENG 187C. Bioengineering Design Project: Implementation (1)
Approaches to implementation of senior design project, including final report. Teams will report on construction of prototypes, conduct of testing, collection of data, and assessment of reliability and failure. Majors must enroll in the course for a letter grade in order to count the sequence toward the major. No exceptions will be approved. Prerequisites: BENG 187B; concurrent enrollment in one of the following lab sections: BENG 119B, BENG 126B, BENG 127B, BENG 128B, BENG 129B, BENG 139B, BENG 147B, BENG 148B, BENG 149B, BENG 169B, or BENG 179B; bioengineering, bioengineering: biotechnology, or bioengineering: biosystems majors only or consent of instructor. (W)

BENG 187D. Bioengineering Design Project: Presentation (1)
Oral presentations of design projects, including design, development, and implementation strategies and results of prototype testing. Majors must enroll in the course for a letter grade in order to count the sequence toward the major. No exceptions will be approved. Prerequisites: BENG 187C; bioengineering, bioengineering: biotechnology, or bioengineering: biosystems majors only or consent of instructor. (S)

BENG 189. Physiological Systems Engineering (4)
Quantitative description of physiological systems, e.g., electrical and mechanical properties of muscle (skeletal and cardiac). Modeling and simulation of properties. Kidney, transport, and models. Neural circuits and models. Prerequisites: BENG 133, 134, 135, 140A and 140B, or consent of department. (S) Not offered until spring 2017.

BENG 191/291. Senior Seminar I: Professional Issues in Bioengineering (2)
(Conjoined with BENG 291.) Instills skills for personal and organizational development during lifelong learning. Student prepares portfolio of personal attributes and experiences, prepares for career interviews plus oral report of interviewing organizational CEO. Graduate students will prepare a NIH small business research grant. Prerequisites: consent of instructor. (F)

BENG 193. Clinical Experience in Bioengineering (4)
Introduction on the integration of bioengineering and clinical medicine through lectures and rotations with clinical faculty. Students will work with clinical mentors and course faculty to identify areas where engineering can improve diagnostics, clinical practice, and/or treatment. May be coscheduled with BENG 294C. Prerequisites: BENG 140A or BIPN 100; BENG 140B or BIPN 102; consent of instructor required. A GPA of 3.5 is requested as a requirement per the agreement with the School of Medicine to ensure that students who are participating in the program have a strong academic background to be in the clinic as an undergraduate. (S)

BENG 195. Teaching (2–4)
Teaching and tutorial assistance in a bioengineering course under supervision of instructor. Not more than four units may be used to satisfy graduation requirements. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: 3.0 GPA in the major and department approval. (F,W,S)

BENG 196. Bioengineering Industrial Internship (1–4)
Under the joint supervision of a faculty adviser and industry mentor, the student will work at or be mentored at a bioengineering industrial company to gain practical bioengineering experience, summarized in a technical report. May be taken for credit up to three times. With department approval, four units of credit may substitute for a technical elective. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of department and completion of all lower-division course requirements, including general-science requirement; laboratory experience. (F,W,S,Su)

BENG 197. Bioengineering Internship (1–4)
An enrichment program, available to a limited number of undergraduate students, which provides work experience with industry, government offices, hospitals, and their practices. Subject to the availability of positions, students will work in a local industry or hospital (on a salaried or unsalaried basis) under the supervision of a faculty member and industrial, government, or hospital employee. Coordination of the Engineering Internship is conducted through UC San Diego’s Academic Internship Program. Time and effort to be arranged. Units may not be applied toward major graduation requirements unless prior approval of a faculty adviser is obtained, and internship is an unsalaried position. Prerequisites: completion of ninety units with a 2.5 GPA and consent of a bioengineering faculty coordinator. (F,W,S,Su)

BENG 198. Directed Group Study in Bioengineering (1–4)
Directed group study, on a topic or in a field not included in the regular department curriculum, by arrangement with a bioengineering faculty member. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: upper-division standing, completion of ninety units of UC San Diego undergraduate study, a minimum UC San Diego GPA of 2.5, consent of instructor, and a completed and approved Special Studies form. (F,W,S)

BENG 199. Independent Study for Bioengineering Undergraduates (4)
Independent reading or research by arrangement with a bioengineering faculty member. May be taken for credit three times. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: upper-division standing, completion of ninety units of UC San Diego undergraduate study, a minimum UC San Diego GPA of 2.5, consent of instructor, and a completed and approved Special Studies form. (F,W,S,Su)

CSE 3. Fluency in Information Technology (4)
Introduces the concepts and skills necessary to effectively use information technology. Includes basic concepts and some practical skills with computer and networks. Prerequisites: none.

CSE 4GS. Mathematical Beauty in Rome (4)
Exploration of topics in mathematics and engineering as they relate to classical architecture in Rome, Italy. In depth geometrical analysis and computer modeling of basic structures (arches, vaults, domes), and on-site studies of the Colosseum, Pantheon, Roman Forum, and St. Peter’s Basilica. Prerequisites: MATH 10A or MATH 20A; department approval, and corequisite of CSE 6GS.

CSE 6GS. Mathematical Beauty in Rome Lab (4)
Companion course to CSE 4GS where theory is applied and lab experiments are carried out “in the field” in Rome, Italy. For final projects, students will select a complex structure (e.g., the Colosseum, the Pantheon, St. Peter’s, etc.) to analyze and model, in detail, using computer-based tools. Prerequisites: MATH 10A or MATH 20A; department approval, and corequisite of CSE 4GS.

CSE 6R. Introduction to Computer Science and Object-Oriented Programming: Python (4)
An introduction to computer science and programming using the Python language. The course will cover topics such as basic data types (e.g., integer, float, string), loops and iteration, basic data structures (e.g., list, set, dictionary), memory models, conditional statements, recursion, basic algorithm time complexity analysis, class design, and inheritance.

CSE 8A. Introduction to Programming and Computational Problem-Solving I (4)
Introductory course for students interested in computer science and programming. Basics of programming including variables, conditionals, loops, functions/methods. Structured data storage such as arrays/lists and dictionaries, including data mutation. Hands-on experience with designing, writing, hand-tracing, compiling or interpreting, executing, testing, and debugging programs. Students solve relevant computational problems using a high-level programming language. CSE 8A is part of a two-course sequence (CSE 8A-B) that is equivalent to CSE 11. Students should take CSE 8B to complete the CSE 8A-B track. Students who have taken CSE 8B or CSE 11 may not take or receive credit for CSE 8A. Students may only receive credit for one of the following: BILD 62, COGS 18, CSE 8A, or CSE 6R. Recommended preparation: No prior programming experience is assumed, but comfort using computers is helpful. Students should consult the “CSE Course Placement Advice” web page for assistance in choosing which CSE course to take first. Prerequisites: restricted to undergraduates. Graduate students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 8B. Introduction to Programming and Computational Problem-Solving II (4)
Introductory programming using an object-oriented approach with the Java programming language. Builds on basic programming constructs introduced in CSE 8A to introduce class design and use, interfaces, basic class hierarchies, recursion, event-based programming, error reporting with exceptions, and file I/O. Basics of command-line navigation for file management and running programs. Development, testing, and debugging of more complex programs. CSE 8B is part of a two-course sequence (CSE 8A-B) that is equivalent to CSE 11. No credit offered for CSE 8B if CSE 11 taken previously. Students may not receive credit for CSE 8B and CSE 11. Students should consult the “CSE Course Placement Advice” web page for assistance in choosing which CSE course to take first Prerequisites: CSE 8A; restricted to undergraduates. Graduate students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 11. Introduction to Programming and Computational Problem-Solving: Accelerated Pace (4)
Accelerated introductory programming including an object-oriented approach. Covers basic programming topics from CSE 8A including variables, conditionals, loops, functions/methods, structured data storage, and mutation. Also covers topics from CSE 8B including the Java programming language, class design, interfaces, basic class hierarchies, recursion, event-based programming, and file I/O. Basics of command-line navigation for file management and running programs. Zero units of credit offered for CSE 11 if CSE 8B taken previously or concurrently. Recommended preparation: Significant prior programming experience (for example, high school AP CSA). Students should consult the “CSE Course Placement Advice” web page for assistance in choosing a first CSE course. Prerequisites: restricted to undergraduates. Graduate students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 12. Basic Data Structures and Object-Oriented Design (4)
Use and implementation of basic data structures including linked lists, stacks, and queues. Use of advanced structures such as binary trees and hash tables. Object-oriented design including interfaces, polymorphism, encapsulation, abstract data types, pre-/post-conditions. Recursion. Uses Java and Java Collections. Prerequisites: CSE 8B or CSE 11; restricted to undergraduates. Graduate students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 15L. Software Tools and Techniques Laboratory (2)
Hands-on exploration of software development tools and techniques. Investigation of the scientific process as applied to software development and debugging. Emphasis is on weekly hands-on laboratory experiences, development of laboratory notebooking techniques as applied to software design. Prerequisites: CSE 8B or CSE 11 or CSE 12 or DSC 30; restricted to undergraduates. Graduate students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 20. Discrete Mathematics (4)
This course will introduce the ways logic is used in computer science: for reasoning, as a language for specifications, and as operations in computation. Concepts include sets, relations, functions, equivalence relations, partial orders, number systems, and proof methods (especially induction and recursion). Propositional and predicate logic will be introduced and applied to various computer science domains such as circuit design, databases, cryptography, and program correctness. Students who have completed MATH 109 may not receive credit for CSE 20. Credit not offered for both MATH 15A and CSE 20. Equivalent to MATH 15A. Prerequisites: CSE 11 or CSE 6R or CSE 8A or CSE 8B or ECE 15. Prerequisite courses must have been completed with a grade of C– or better; restricted to undergraduates. Graduate students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 21. Mathematics for Algorithms and Systems (4)
This course will cover mathematical concepts used to model and analyze algorithms and computer systems. Topics include counting techniques (inclusion-exclusion; recursive counting; permutations and combinations), data representations, analysis of algorithms (order notation; time complexities; loop invariants), recurrence relations, graphs and trees (data structure representations; basic graph algorithms; special classes of graphs), and basic probability and its applications. Prerequisites: CSE 20 or MATH 15A or MATH 31CH; students who have completed MATH 154 or MATH 184 or MATH 188 previously or concurrently may not receive credit for CSE 21; restricted to undergraduates. Graduate students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 30. Computer Organization and Systems Programming (4)
Introduction to organization of modern digital computers—understanding the various components of a computer and their interrelationships. Study of a specific architecture/machine with emphasis on systems programming in C and Assembly languages in a UNIX environment. Prerequisites: CSE 12 and CSE 15L; restricted to undergraduates. Graduate students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 42. Building and Programming Electronic Devices (2)
This course allows students to use what they learned in introductory programming courses to make things happen in the real world. Working in teams, students will first learn to program Arduino-based devices. Teams of students will design a custom device and program it to do their bidding. This course is targeted to first-year students and sophomores in engineering and science disciplines who want to practice applying what they have learned in a programming class and to have the chance to program things other than computers. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: restricted to first-year and sophomore students; instructor approval required.

CSE 86. C++ for Java Programmers (2)
Helps the Java programmer to be productive in the C++ programming environment. Topics include the similarities and differences between Java and C++ with special attention to pointers, operator overloading, templates, the STL, the preprocessor, and the C++ Runtime Environment. Prerequisites: CSE 12 or consent of instructor.

CSE 87. First-year Student Seminar (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students. Prerequisites: none.

CSE 89. Introduction to Computer Science and Engineering Seminar (2)
A seminar format discussion led by CSE faculty on topics in central areas of computer science, concentrating on the relation among them, recent developments, and future directions. This seminar introduces incoming students to resources and opportunities in the CSE department. May be taken for credit up to three times. Restricted to students in the CSE-PACE program. Prerequisites: none.

CSE 90. Undergraduate Seminar (1)
A seminar providing an overview of a topic of current research interest to the instructor. The goal is to present a specialized topic in computer science and engineering students. May be taken for credit three times when topics vary. 

CSE 91. Perspectives in Computer Science and Engineering (2)
A seminar format discussion led by CSE faculty on topics in central areas of computer science, concentrating on the relation among them, recent developments, and future directions. Prerequisites: majors only.

CSE 95. Tutor Apprenticeship (2)
Students assigned to tutor for a CSE course for the first time receive individual and group mentoring and training on how to be effective tutors to help them develop the skills and tools needed to be effective in their tutor role. Students must have a concurrent tutor appointment in a CSE course. See CSE website for application information.

CSE 99. Independent Study in Computer Science and Engineering (4)
Independent reading or research by special arrangement with a faculty member. Prerequisites: lower-division standing. Completion of thirty units at UC San Diego with a UC San Diego GPA of 3.0. Special Studies form required. Department stamp required. Consent of instructor and approval of the department.

CSE 100. Advanced Data Structures (4)
High-performance data structures and supporting algorithms. Use and implementation of data structures like (un)balanced trees, graphs, priority queues, and hash tables. Also, memory management, pointers, recursion. Theoretical and practical performance analysis, both average case and amortized. Uses C++ and STL. Recommended preparation: background in C or C++ programming. Prerequisites: CSE 21 or MATH 154 or MATH 158 or MATH 184 or MATH 188 and CSE 12 and CSE 15L and CSE 30 or ECE 15; restricted to undergraduates. Graduate students will be allowed as space permits. Students may not receive credit for both CSE 100R and CSE 100.

CSE 100R. Advanced Data Structures (4)
High-performance data structures and supporting algorithms. Use and implementation of data structures like (un)balanced trees, graphs, priority queues, and hash tables. Also memory management, pointers, recursion. Theoretical and practical performance analysis, both average case and amortized. Uses C++ and STL. Prerequisites: CSE 21 or MATH 154 or MATH 158 or MATH 184 or MATH 188 and CSE 12 and CSE 15L and CSE 30 or ECE 15. This course is a distance education course. Students may not receive credit for both CSE 100R and CSE 100.

CSE 101. Design and Analysis of Algorithms (4)
Design and analysis of efficient algorithms with emphasis of nonnumerical algorithms such as sorting, searching, pattern matching, and graph and network algorithms. Measuring complexity of algorithms, time and storage. NP-complete problems. Prerequisites: CSE 21 or MATH 154 or MATH 158 or MATH 184 or MATH 188 and CSE 12 or DSC 30; restricted to undergraduates. Graduate students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 103. A Practical Introduction to Probability and Statistics (4)
Distributions over the real line. Independence, expectation, conditional expectation, mean, variance. Hypothesis testing. Learning classifiers. Distributions over R^n, covariance matrix. Binomial, Poisson distributions. Chernoff bound. Entropy. Compression. Arithmetic coding. Maximal likelihood estimation. Bayesian estimation. CSE 103 is not duplicate credit for ECE 109, ECON 120A, or MATH 183. Prerequisites: MATH 20B and CSE 21 or MATH 154 or MATH 158 or MATH 184 or MATH 188; restricted to CS25, CS26, CS27, and CS28 majors. Other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 105. Theory of Computability (4) Tag: Theory/Abstraction
An introduction to the mathematical theory of computability. Formal languages. Finite automata and regular expressions. Push-down automata and context-free languages. Computable or recursive functions: Turing machines, the halting problem. Undecidability. Prerequisites: CSE 12 and CSE 15L and CSE 20 or MATH 109 or MATH 15A or MATH 31CH and CSE 21 or MATH 100A or MATH 103A or MATH 154 or MATH 158 or MATH 184 or MATH 188. Graduate students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 106. Discrete and Continuous Optimization (4) Tag: Theory/Abstraction
One frequently deals with problems in engineering, data science, business, economics, and other disciplines for which algorithmic solutions that optimize a given quantity under constraints are desired. This course is an introduction to the models, theory, methods, and applications of discrete and continuous optimization. Topics include shortest paths, flows, linear, integer, and convex programming, and continuous optimization techniques such as steepest descent and Lagrange multipliers. Prerequisites: MATH 18 or MATH 31AH and MATH 20C or MATH 31BH and CSE 21 or DSC 40B or MATH 154 or MATH 158 or MATH 184 or MATH 188.

CSE 107. Introduction to Modern Cryptography (4) Tag: Theory/Abstraction
Topics include private and public-key cryptography, block ciphers, data encryption, authentication, key distribution and certification, pseudorandom number generators, design and analysis of protocols, zero-knowledge proofs, and advanced protocols. Emphasizes rigorous mathematical approach including formal definitions of security goals and proofs of protocol security. Prerequisites: CSE 21 or MATH 154 or MATH 158 or MATH 184 or MATH 188 and CSE 101 and CSE 105; restricted to students within the CS25, CS26, CS27, CS28, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 109. Introduction to Programming Contests (2)
This course introduces the algorithms and concepts necessary to compete in programming contests like ACM International Collegiate Programming Contest (ICPC). The course requires weekly completion of short problem sets. Topics covered include standard library classes and data structures useful for programming contest problems, basic complexity analysis, dynamic programming, graph algorithms, number theory, combinatorics, computational geometry, combinatorial games, and contest strategy. Prerequisites: CSE 30 or permission of instructor.

CSE 110. Software Engineering (4)
Introduction to software development and engineering methods, including specification, design, implementation, testing, and process. An emphasis on team development, agile methods, and use of tools such as IDE’s, version control, and test harnesses. Prerequisites: CSE 100 or CSE 100R; restricted to students within the CS25, CS26, CS27, CS28, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 112. Advanced Software Engineering (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
This course will cover software engineering topics associated with large systems development such as requirements and specifications, testing and maintenance, and design. Specific attention will be given to development tools and automated support environments. Prerequisites: CSE 110; restricted to students within the CS25, CS26, CS27, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 118. Ubiquitous Computing (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
Explores emerging opportunities enabled by cheap sensors and networked computing devices. Small research projects will be conducted in teams, culminating in project presentations at the end of the term. Section will cover material relevant to the project, such as research methods, software engineering, teamwork, and project management. Prerequisites: any course from the following: CSE 131, CSE 132B, COGS 102C, COGS 121, COGS 184, COMT 111B, COMT 115, ECE 111, ECE 118, ECE 191, ECE 192, or ICAM 160B; or consent of instructor.

CSE 120. Principles of Computer Operating Systems (4) Tag: Systems
Basic functions of operating systems; basic kernel structure, concurrency, memory management, virtual memory, file systems, process scheduling, security and protection. Prerequisites: CSE 30 and CSE 101 and CSE 110; restricted to students within the CS25, CS26, CS27, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 121. Real-World Operating Systems (4) Tag: Systems
Case study of architecture and implementation of a modern operating system or parts of multiple operating systems. In-depth analysis through detailed study of deployed source code. Topics vary based on OS understudy each term. Emphasis on emerging concerns and the new techniques and technologies used to address them. Recommended preparation: Knowledge of programming languages and paradigms, the components that comprise them, and the principles of language design are strongly recommended but not required. Prerequisites: CSE 120.

CSE 122. Wireless Networks (4) Tag: Systems
This course covers the design, operation, and use of wireless technologies, with emphasis on how physical resource constraints and application constraints meet to affect link, network, system, and application design, with hands-on experience in multiple technologies. May be coscheduled with CSE 222C. Recommended preparation: Basics of software engineering, modular design, data structures, physical (in-memory) representation of data structures, code compilation, build systems, version control, debuggers, C code, and pointer manipulation in C. Prerequisites: CSE 30 or ECE 30 and CSE 101 or ECE 141A and CSE 110 or ECE 141B.

CSE 123. Computer Networks (4) Tag: Systems
Introduction to concepts, principles, and practice of computer communication networks with examples from existing architectures, protocols, and standards with special emphasis on the internet protocols. Layering and the OSI model; physical and data link layers; local and wide area networks; datagrams and virtual circuits; routing and congestion control; internetworking. Transport protocols. Credit may not be received for both CSE 123 and ECE 158A. Prerequisites: CSE 30 and CSE 101 and CSE 110; restricted to students within the CS25, CS26, CS27, CS28, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 124. Networked Services (4) Tag: Systems
(Renumbered from CSE 123B.) The architecture of modern networked services, including data center design, enterprise storage, fault tolerance, and load balancing. Protocol software structuring, the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), remote procedure calls, protocols for digital audio and video communication, overlay and peer-to-peer systems, secure communication. Credit may not be received for both CSE 124 and ECE 158B. Students may not receive credit for both CSE 123B and CSE 124. Prerequisites: CSE 30 and CSE 101 and CSE 110; restricted to students within the CS25, CS26, CS27, CS28, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 125. Software System Design and Implementation (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
Design and implementation of large, complex software systems involving multiple aspects of CSE curriculum. Emphasis is on software system design applied to a single, large group project with close interaction with instructor. Prerequisites: senior standing with substantial programming experience, and consent of instructor. Department stamp required.

CSE 127. Introduction to Computer Security (4) Tags: Systems, Applications of Computing
Topics include basic cryptography, security/threat analysis, access control, auditing, security models, distributed systems security, and theory behind common attack and defense techniques. The class will go over formal models as well as the bits and bytes of security exploits. Prerequisites: CSE 21 or MATH 154 or MATH 158 or MATH 184 or MATH 188 and CSE 120 or CSE 123 or CSE 124; restricted to students within the CS25, CS26, CS27, CS28, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 130. Programming Languages: Principles and Paradigms (4) Tag: Theory/Abstraction
(Formerly CSE 173.) Introduction to programming languages and paradigms, the components that comprise them, and the principles of language design, all through the analysis and comparison of a variety of languages (e.g., Pascal, Ada, C++, PROLOG, ML.) Will involve programming in most languages studied. Prerequisites: CSE 12 and CSE 100 or CSE 100R and CSE 105; restricted to students within the CS25, CS26, CS27, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 131. Compiler Construction (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
(Formerly CSE 131B.) Introduction to the compilation of programming languages, practice of syntax-directed translation, type checking, code generation, optimization, interpretation, and compiler structure. Students may receive repeat credit for CSE 131A and CSE 131B by completing CSE 131. May be coscheduled with CSE 231. Prerequisites: CSE 100 or CSE 100R and CSE 105 and CSE 130; restricted to CS25, CS26, CS27, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 132A. Database System Principles (4) Tag: Theory/Abstraction
Basic concepts of databases, including data modeling, relational databases, query languages, optimization, dependencies, schema design, and concurrency control. Exposure to one or several commercial database systems. Advanced topics such as deductive and object-oriented databases, time allowing. Prerequisites: CSE 100 or CSE 100R; restricted to students within the CS25, CS26, CS27, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 132B. Database Systems Applications (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
Design of databases, transactions, use of trigger facilities and datablades. Performance measuring, organization of index structures. Prerequisites: CSE 132A; restricted to CS25, CS26, CS27, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 132C. Database System Implementation (4) Tag: Systems
This is a systems-focused course on the internals of a relational database management system (RDBMS). RDBMSs power large-scale structured data management in most digital applications. The topics span data storage, buffer management, indexing, sorting, relational operator implementations, query processing and optimization, parallel RDBMSs, and “Big Data” systems. Two C++ programming projects require implementation of a buffer manager and a B+ tree index using a given RDBMS skeleton. Recommended preparation: C++ programming knowledge is required; CSE 132B is recommended. Prerequisites: CSE 132A or DSC 102; restricted to CS25, CS26, CS27, CS28, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 134B. Web Client Languages (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
Design and implementation of interactive World Wide Web clients using helper applications and plug-ins. The main language covered will be Java. Prerequisites: CSE 100 or CSE 100R; restricted to CS25, CS26, CS27, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 135. Online Database Analytics Applications (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
Database, data warehouse, and data cube design; SQL programming and querying with emphasis on analytics; online analytics applications, visualizations, and data exploration; performance tuning. Prerequisites: CSE 100 or CSE 100R; restricted to students within the CS25, CS26, CS27, CS28, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 136. Enterprise-Class Web Applications (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
Design and implementation of very large-scale, web-based applications. Topics covered typically include modeling organizational needs, design and revision management, J2EE or similar software platforms, web server and application server functionality, reuse of object-oriented components, model-view-controller and other design patterns, clustering, load-balancing, fault-tolerance, authentication, and usage accounting. Prerequisites: CSE 135.

CSE 140. Components and Design Techniques for Digital Systems (4) Tags: Systems, Theory/Abstraction, Applications of Computing
Design of Boolean logic and finite state machines; two-level, multilevel combinational logic design, combinational modules and modular networks, Mealy and Moore machines, analysis and synthesis of canonical forms, sequential modules. Prerequisites: CSE 20 or MATH 109 or MATH 15A or MATH 31CH and CSE 30; CSE 140L must be taken concurrently; restricted to CS25, CS26, CS27, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 140L. Digital Systems Laboratory (2) Tags: Systems, Applications of Computing
Implementation with computer-aided design tools for combinational logic minimization and state machine synthesis. Hardware construction of a small digital system. Prerequisites: CSE 20 or MATH 109 or MATH 15A or MATH 31CH and CSE 30; CSE 140 must be taken concurrently; restricted to CS25, CS26, CS27, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 141. Introduction to Computer Architecture (4) Tag: Systems
Introduction to computer architecture. Computer system design. Processor design. Control design. Memory systems. Two units of credit offered for CSE 141 if CSE 142 taken previously. Prerequisites: CSE 30 and CSE 140 and CSE 140L; CSE 141L should be taken concurrently; restricted to CS25, CS26, CS27, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 141L. Project in Computer Architecture (2) Tag: Systems
Hands-on computer architecture project aiming to familiarize students with instruction set architecture, and design of process. Control and memory systems. Prerequisites: CSE 30 and CSE 140 and CSE 140L; CSE 141 should be taken concurrently; restricted to CS25, CS26, CS27, CS28, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 142. Introduction to Computer Architecture: A Software Perspective (4) Tag: Systems
This course covers the operation, structure, and programming interfaces of modern CPUs with an emphasis on exploiting processor features to improve software performance and efficiency. The topics covered in this course include performance, energy, x86 assembly, compiler optimizations, pipelining, instruction-level parallelism, caches, memory-level parallelism, multi-threading, multi-core processors, and SIMD. Two units of credit offered for CSE 142 if CSE 141 taken previously or concurrently. Prerequisites: CSE 30 and CSE 100 or CSE 100R; CSE 142L should be taken concurrently. Restricted to students within the CS25, CS26, CS27, CS28, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 142L. Software Project for Computer Architecture (2) Tags: Systems, Applications of Computing
This course provides hands-on experience in using the features of modern CPUs to increase the performance and efficiency of programs. Prerequisites: CSE 30 and CSE 100 or CSE 100R; CSE 142 should be taken concurrently. Restricted to students within the CS25, CS26, CS27, CS28, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 143. Microelectronic System Design (4) Tag: Systems
VLSI process technologies; circuit characterization; logic design styles; clocking strategies; computer-aided design tools; subsystem design; design case studies. System design project from hardware description, logic synthesis, physical layout to design verification. Prerequisites: CSE 140. Restricted to CS25, CS26, CS27, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 145. Embedded System Design Project (4) Tags: Systems, Applications of Computing
Project class building an embedded computing system. Learn fundamental knowledge of microcontrollers, sensors, and actuators. Introduction to the hardware and software tools to build project in a team environment and end-to-end system building. Prerequisites: instructor approval required, by application only.

CSE 147. Introduction to Embedded Systems (4) Tag: Systems
This course introduces the breadth of embedded systems, including hardware, software and modeling techniques. Embedded hardware topics include various types of processors and accelerators, memory, system and communication interfaces, sensors, and actuators. Embedded software includes timing, real-time and distributed scheduling, operating systems. The class will have design projects using off the shelf hardware and software components. Recommended preparation: Basic understanding of operating systems and computer architecture is strongly recommended. Prerequisites: CSE 30.

CSE 148. Advanced Processor Architecture Design Project (4) Tags: Systems, Applications of Computing
Students will use hardware description language tools to add advanced architectural features to a basic processor design. These features may include pipelining, superscalar execution, branch prediction, and advanced cache features. Designs will be implemented in programmable logic devices. Prerequisites: CSE 141 and CSE 141L; graduate students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 150A. Introduction to Artificial Intelligence: Probabilistic Reasoning and Decision-Making (4) Tag: Theory/Abstraction
Introduction to probabilistic models at the heart of modern artificial intelligence. Specific topics to be covered include probabilistic methods for reasoning and decision-making under uncertainty; inference and learning in Bayesian networks; prediction and planning in Markov decision processes; applications to intelligent systems, speech and natural language processing, information retrieval, and robotics. Prerequisites: CSE 12 or DSC 40B and CSE 15L or DSC 80 and COGS 118D or CSE 103 or ECE 109 or ECON 120A or MATH 180A or MATH 183 and MATH 20A and MATH 18 or MATH 31AH; restricted to students within the CS25, CS26, CS27, CS28, EC26, and DS25 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 150B. Introduction to Artificial Intelligence: Search and Reasoning (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
The course will introduce important ideas and algorithms in search and reasoning and demonstrate how they are used in practical AI applications. Topics include A* search, adversarial search, Monte Carlo tree search, reinforcement learning, constraint solving and optimization, propositional and first-order reasoning. Prerequisites: CSE 12 or DSC 40B and CSE 15L or DSC 80 and COGS 118D or CSE 103 or ECE 109 or ECON 120A or MATH 180A or MATH 183 and CSE 100 or CSE 100R; restricted to students within the CS25, CS26, CS27, CS28, EC26, and DS25 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 151A. Machine Learning: Learning Algorithms (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
Broad introduction to machine learning. The topics include some topics in supervised learning, such as k-nearest neighbor classifiers, decision trees, boosting, and perceptrons; and topics in unsupervised learning, such as k-means and hierarchical clustering. In addition to the actual algorithms, the course focuses on the principles behind the algorithms. Students may not receive credit for both CSE 151A and COGS 188, nor may they receive credit for both CSE 151A and CSE 151. Course may be  coscheduled with CSE 251A. Prerequisites: CSE 12 or DSC 40B and CSE 15L or DSC 80 and COGS 118D or CSE 103 or ECE 109 or ECON 120A or MAE 108 or MATH 180A or MATH 180B or MATH 181A or MATH 183 or MATH 186 and MATH 18 or MATH 31AH and MATH 20C or MATH 31BH; restricted to students within the CS25, CS26, CS27, CS28, EC26, and DS25 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 151B. Deep Learning (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
(Formerly CSE 154.) This course covers the fundamentals of neural networks. We introduce linear regression, logistic regression, perceptrons, multilayer networks and back-propagation, convolutional neural networks, recurrent networks, and deep networks trained by reinforcement learning. Students may receive credit for one of the following: CSE 151B, CSE 154, or COGS 181. Prerequisites: MATH 20C or MATH 31BH and BENG 134 or COGS 118D or CSE 103 or ECE 109 or ECON 120A or MAE 108 or MATH 181A or MATH 183 or MATH 186; restricted to students with sophomore, junior, or senior standing within the CS25, CS26, CS27, CS28, EC26, and DS25 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 152A. Introduction to Computer Vision I (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
This course provides a broad introduction to the foundations, algorithms, and applications of computer vision. It introduces classical models and contemporary methods, from image formation models to deep learning, to address problems of 3-D reconstruction and object recognition from images and video. Topics include filtering, feature detection, stereo vision, structure from motion, motion estimation, and recognition. Programming assignments will be in Python. Students may not receive credit for both CSE 152A and CSE 152. Prerequisites: MATH 18 or MATH 31AH and CSE 12 or DSC 30 and CSE 15L or DSC 80; Python programming experience recommended; restricted to students within the CS25, CS26, CS27, CS28, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 152B. Introduction to Computer Vision II (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
This course covers advanced topics needed to apply computer vision in industry or follow current research. Example topics include real-time systems for 3-D computer vision, machine learning tools such as support-vector machine (SVM) and boosting for image classification, and deep neural networks for object detection and semantic segmentation. Prerequisites: CSE 152A or CSE 152 or CSE 166; Python programming experience recommended; restricted to students within the CS25, CS26, CS27, CS28, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 156. Statistical Natural Language Processing (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
Natural language processing (NLP) is a field of AI which aims to equip computers with the ability to intelligently process natural (human) language. This course will explore statistical techniques for the automatic analysis of natural language data. Specific topics covered include probabilistic language models, which define probability distributions over text passages; text classification; sequence models; parsing sentences into syntactic representations; and machine translation. Prerequisites: CSE 12 or DSC 40B and CSE 15L or DSC 80 and BENG 134 or COGS 118D or CSE 103 or ECE 109 or ECON 120A or MATH 180A or MATH 181A or MATH 183 or MATH 186; restricted to students within the CS25, CS26, CS27, CS28, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 158. Recommender Systems and Web Mining (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
Current methods for data mining and predictive analytics. Emphasis is on studying real-world data sets, building working systems, and putting current ideas from machine learning research into practice. Prerequisites: CSE 12 or DSC 40B and CSE 15L or DSC 80 and BENG 100 or BENG 134 or COGS 118D or CSE 103 or ECE 109 or ECON 120A or MATH 180A or MATH 181A or MATH 183 or MATH 186; restricted to students within the CS25, CS26, CS27, CS28, EC26, and DS25 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits. May be coscheduled with CSE 258. Students may not receive credit for CSE 158 and CSE 158R or DSC 148.

CSE 158R. Recommender Systems and Web Mining (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
Current methods for data mining and predictive analytics. Emphasis is on studying real-world data sets, building working systems, and putting current ideas from machine learning research into practice. Prerequisites: CSE 12 or DSC 40B and CSE 15L or DSC 80 and BENG 100 or BENG 134 or COGS 118D or CSE 103 or ECE 109 or ECON 120A or MATH 180A or MATH 181A or MATH 183 or MATH 186; restricted to students within the CS25, CS26, CS27, CS28, EC26, and DS25 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits. This will be a fully online class based on extensive educational materials and an online educational platform. May be coscheduled with CSE 258R. Students may not receive credit for CSE 158R and CSE 158 or DSC 148.

CSE 160. Introduction to Parallel Computing (4) Tag: Systems
Introduction to high performance parallel computing: parallel architecture, algorithms, software, and problem-solving techniques. Areas covered: Flynn’s taxonomy, processor-memory organizations, shared and nonshared memory models: message passing and multithreading, data parallelism; speedup, efficiency and Amdahl’s law, communication and synchronization, isoefficiency and scalability. Assignments given to provide practical experience. Prerequisites: CSE 100 or CSE 100R; restricted to CS25, CS26, CS27, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits

CSE 163. Advanced Computer Graphics (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
Topics include an overview of many aspects of computer graphics, including the four main computer graphics areas of animation, modeling, rendering, and imaging. Programming projects in image and signal processing, geometric modeling, and real-time rendering. Prerequisites: CSE 167; restricted to CS25, CS26, CS27, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 165. 3-D User Interaction (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
This course focuses on the design of three-dimensional (3-D) user interfaces, VR devices, and interaction techniques. The course consists of lectures, student presentations, and programming assignments. Students will be expected to create VR applications to learn how VR displays and 3-D interactions work. Prerequisites: CSE 167; restricted to CS25, CS26, CS27, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 166. Image Processing (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
Principles of image formation, analysis, and representation. Image enhancement, restoration, and segmentation; stochastic image models. Filter design, sampling, Fourier and wavelet transforms. Selected applications in computer graphics and machine vision. Prerequisites: DSC 40B or MATH 18 or MATH 31AH and CSE 100 or CSE 100R or DSC 80.

CSE 167. Computer Graphics (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
Representation and manipulation of pictorial data. Two-dimensional and three-dimensional transformations, curves, surfaces. Projection, illumination, and shading models. Raster and vector graphic I/O devices; retained-mode and immediate-mode graphics software systems and applications. Students may not receive credit for both MATH 155A and CSE 167. Prerequisites: CSE 100 or CSE 100R; restricted to CS25, CS26, CS27, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 168. Computer Graphics II: Rendering (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
Weekly programming assignments that will cover graphics rendering algorithms. During the course the students will learn about ray tracing, geometry, tessellation, acceleration structures, sampling, filtering, shading models, and advanced topics such as global illumination and programmable graphics hardware. Prerequisites: CSE 167; restricted to CS25, CS26, CS27, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 169. Computer Animation (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
Advanced graphics focusing on the programming techniques involved in computer animation. Algorithms and approaches for both character animation and physically based animation. Particular subjects may include skeletons, skinning, key framing, facial animation, inverse kinematics, locomotion, motion capture, video game animation, particle systems, rigid bodies, clothing, and hair. Recommended preparation: an understanding of linear algebra. Prerequisites: CSE 167; restricted to CS25, CS26, CS27, and EC26 majors. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

CSE 170. Interaction Design (5) Tag: Applications of Computing
Introduces fundamental methods and principles for designing, implementing, and evaluating user interfaces. Topics include user-centered design, rapid prototyping, experimentation, direct manipulation, cognitive principles, visual design, social software, software tools. Learn by doing: Work with a team on a quarter-long design project. Students may not receive credit for COGS 120 and CSE 170. Recommended preparation: Basic familiarity with HTML. Prerequisites: COGS 108 or CSE 12 or DSC 30 and COGS 1 or COGS 10 or DSGN 1 or ENG 100D.

CSE 175. Successful Entrepreneurship for Engineers (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
A foundation course teaching the basics of starting and running a successful new business. Students learn how to think like entrepreneurs, pivot their ideas to match customer needs, with financial, market, timeline feasibility inputs. The end goal is an investor pitch and a business plan. Provides experiential education, encouragement, and coaching (E3CE) that prepares students for successful careers at start-up as well as large companies. Prerequisites: instructor approval required to ensure sufficient project experience to be successful in the course. No credit offered for CSE 175 if ECE 150 taken previously or concurrently.

CSE 176A. Health Care Robotics (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
Robotics has the potential to improve well-being for millions of people and support caregivers and to aid the clinical workforce. We bring together engineers, clinicians, and end users to explore this exciting new field. The course is project-based, interactive, and hands-on, and involves working closely with stakeholders to develop prototypes that solve real-world problems. Students will explore the latest research in health care robotics, human-robot teaming, and health design. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: CSE 110 or CSE 170 or COGS 120.

CSE 176E. Robot Systems Design and Implementation (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
End-to-end system design of embedded electronic systems including PCB design and fabrication, software control system development, and system integration. Program or materials fees may apply. May be coscheduled with CSE 276E. Prerequisites: restricted to junior and senior students; instructor approval required.

CSE 180. Biology Meets Computing (4)
Topics include an overview of various aspects of bioinformatics and will simultaneously introduce students to programming in Python. The assessments in the course represent various programming challenges and include solving diverse biological problems using popular bioinformatics tools. Students may not receive credit for CSE 180 and CSE 180R. Prerequisites: BILD 1 or BILD 4 or CSE 11 or CSE 3 or CSE 8A or CSE 8B.

CSE 180R. Biology Meets Computing (4)
Topics include an overview of various aspects of bioinformatics and will simultaneously introduce students to programming in Python. The assessments in the course represent various programming challenges and include solving diverse biological problems using popular bioinformatics tools. This will be a fully online class based on extensive educational materials and online educational platform Stepik developed with HHMI, NIH, and ILTI support. Students may not receive credit for CSE 180 and CSE 180R. Prerequisites: BILD 1 or BILD 4 or CSE 11 or CSE 3 or CSE 8A or CSE 8B.

CSE 181. Molecular Sequence Analysis (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
This course covers the analysis of nucleic acid and protein sequences, with an emphasis on the application of algorithms to biological problems. Topics include sequence alignments, database searching, comparative genomics, and phylogenetic and clustering analyses. Pairwise alignment, multiple alignment, DNS sequencing, scoring functions, fast database search, comparative genomics, clustering, phylogenetic trees, gene finding/DNA statistics. Students may receive credit for one of the following: CSE 181, BIMM 181, or BENG 181. Prerequisites: CSE 100 or CSE 100R and CSE 101 and BIMM 100 or CHEM 114C; restricted to BE28, BI34, CH37, and CS27 majors. Students may receive credit for one of the following: CSE 181, BIMM 181, or BENG 181.

CSE 182. Biological Databases (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
This course provides an introduction to the features of biological data, how those data are organized efficiently in databases, and how existing data resources can be utilized to solve a variety of biological problems. Object oriented databases, data modeling and description. Survey of current biological database with respect to above, implementation of a database on a biological topic. Students may receive credit for one of the following: CSE 182, BENG 182, or BIMM 182. Prerequisites: CSE 100 or CSE 100R; restricted to BE28, BI34, CH37, and CS27 majors.

CSE 184. Computational Molecular Biology (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
This advanced course covers the application of machine learning and modeling techniques to biological systems. Topics include gene structure, recognition of DNA and protein sequence patterns, classification, and protein structure prediction. Pattern discovery, Hidden Markov models/support victor machines/neural network/profiles. Protein structure prediction, functional characterization or proteins, functional genomics/proteomics, metabolic pathways/gene networks. Cross-listed with BIMM 184/BENG 184/CHEM 184. Prerequisites: BIMM 181 or BENG 181 or CSE 181, BENG 182 or BIMM 182 or CSE 182 or CHEM 182. Bioinformatics majors only.

CSE 185. Advanced Bioinformatics Laboratory (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
This course emphasizes the hands-on application of bioinformatics to biological problems. Students will gain experience in the application of existing software, as well as in combining approaches to answer specific biological questions. Topics include sequence alignment, fast database search, comparative genomics, expression analysis, computational proteomics, genome-wide association studies, next-generation sequencing, genomics, and big data. Students may not receive credit for CSE 185 and BIMM 185. Restricted to CS27, BI34, BE28, and CH37 majors. Prerequisites: CSE 11 or CSE 8B and CSE 12 and MATH 20C or MATH 31BH and BILD 1 and BIEB 123 or BILD 4 or BIMM 101 or CHEM 109.

CSE 190. Topics in Computer Science and Engineering (4)
Topics of special interest in computer science and engineering. Topics may vary from quarter to quarter. May be repeated for credit with the consent of instructor. May be taken for credit up to three times. May be coscheduled with CSE 291. Prerequisites: consent of instructor. Department stamp required.

CSE 191. Seminar in CSE (1–4)
A seminar course on topics of current interest. Students, as well as the instructor, will be actively involved in running the course/class. This course cannot be counted toward a technical elective. Prerequisites: consent of instructor. Department stamp required.

CSE 192. Senior Seminar in Computer Science and Engineering (1)
The Senior Seminar Program is designed to allow senior undergraduates to meet with faculty members in a small group setting to explore an intellectual topic in CSE (at the upper-division level). Topics will vary from quarter to quarter. Senior seminars may be taken for credit up to four times, with a change in topic, and permission of the department. Enrollment is limited to twenty students, with preference given to seniors. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: upper-division standing; department stamp required and consent of instructor.

CSE 193. Introduction to Computer Science Research (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
Introduction to research in computer science. Topics include defining a CS research problem, finding and reading technical papers, oral communication, technical writing, and independent learning. Course participants apprentice with a CSE research group and propose an original research project. Prerequisites: consent of the department chair. Department stamp required.

CSE 194. Race, Gender, and Computing (4) Tag: Applications of Computing
This course explores the challenges of diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) in computing and technology through an introduction to and analysis of various social constructs and their impact on not only computing-related organizations, but also the technologies developed and the people affected by them. This course also introduces students to cultural competence in the context of computing. Prerequisites: AAS 10 or CSE 12 or ECE 35 or ETHN 3 or HILD 7A or LTEN 27 and CAT 125 or CAT 125R or CAT 3 or DOC 3 or HUM 2 or MCWP 125 or MCWP 125R or MCWP 50 or MCWP 50R or MMW 121 or MMW 121R or MMW 122 or MMW 13 or SYN 2 or WCWP 100 or WCWP 10B.

CSE 197. Field Study in Computer Science and Engineering (4)
Directed study accompanying full-time on-site computer science internships. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of the instructor and approval of the department required. Students may receive credit for one of the following: CSE 197 or CSE 197C. Restricted to CS25, CS26, CS27, and CS28 majors only.

CSE 197C. Cooperative Practicum in Computer Science and Engineering (12)
Directed study accompanying full-time on-site computer science cooperative education practicum. Prerequisites: department approval. Restricted to CS25, CS26, and CS27 majors only. Students may receive credit for one of the following: CSE 197C or CSE 197.

CSE 198. Directed Group Study in Computer Science (2 or 4)
Computer science and engineering topics whose study involves reading and discussion by a small group of students under the supervision of a faculty member. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of the instructor. Department stamp required.

CSE 199. Independent Study for Undergraduates in Computer Science (2 or 4)
Independent reading or research by special arrangement with a faculty member. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of the instructor. Department stamp required.

CSE 199H. CSE Honors Thesis Research for Undergraduates (4)
Undergraduate research for completing an honors project under the supervision of a CSE faculty member. May be taken across multiple quarters. Students should enroll for a letter grade. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: Admission to the CSE department honors program. Consent of the instructor. Department stamp required.

ECE 5. Introduction to Electrical and Computer Engineering (4)
An introduction to electrical and computer engineering. Topics include circuit theory, assembly, and testing, embedded systems programming and debugging, transducer mechanisms and interfacing transducers, signals and systems theory, digital signal processing, and modular design techniques.

ECE 15. Engineering Computation (4)
Students learn the C programming language with an emphasis on high-performance numerical computation. The commonality across programming languages of control structures, data structures, and I/O is also covered. Techniques for using MATLAB to graph the results of C computations are developed. Prerequisites: a familiarity with basic mathematics such as trigonometry functions and graphing is expected but this course assumes no prior programming knowledge.

ECE 16. Rapid Hardware and Software Design for Interfacing with the World (4)
Students are introduced to embedded systems concepts with structured development of a computer controller based on electromyogram (EMG) signals through four lab assignments through the quarter. Key concepts include sampling, signal processing, communication, and real-time control. Students will apply their prior knowledge in C (from ECE15) to program microcontrollers and will engage in data analysis using the Python programming language. Prerequisites: MAE 8 or CSE 8B or CSE 11 or ECE 15.

ECE 17. Object-Oriented Programming: Design and Development with C++ (4)
This course combines the fundamentals of object-oriented design in C++, with the programming, debugging, and testing practices used by modern software developers. Emphasizes the use of object-oriented techniques to model and reason about system design, and using modern C++ idioms, design patterns, and the Standard Template Library (STL) to develop solutions to systems engineering challenges that are more reliable, robust, scalable, and secure. Prerequisites: CSE 8B or CSE 11 or ECE 15.

ECE 25. Introduction to Digital Design (4)
This course emphasizes digital electronics. Principles introduced in lectures are used in laboratory assignments, which also serve to introduce experimental and design methods. Topics include Boolean algebra, combination and sequential logic, gates and their implementation in digital circuits. (Course materials and/or program fees may apply.) Prerequisites: none.

ECE 30. Introduction to Computer Engineering (4)
The fundamentals of both the hardware and software in a computer system. Topics include representation of information, computer organization and design, assembly and microprogramming, current technology in logic design. Prerequisites: ECE 15 and 25 with grades of C– or better.

ECE 35. Introduction to Analog Design (4)
Fundamental circuit theory concepts, Kirchhoff’s voltage and current laws, Thevenin’s and Norton’s theorems, loop and node analysis, time-varying signals, transient first order circuits, steady-state sinusoidal response. It is highly recommended taking MATH 20C and PHYS 2B prior or during the same quarter. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: MATH 18, 20A–B, and PHYS 2A.

ECE 45. Circuits and Systems (4)
Steady-state circuit analysis, first and second order systems, Fourier Series and Transforms, time domain analysis, convolution, transient response, Laplace Transform, and filter design. Prerequisites: ECE 35.

ECE 65. Components and Circuits Laboratory (4)
Introduction to linear and nonlinear components and circuits. Topics will include two terminal devices, bipolar and field-effect transistors, and large and small signal analysis of diode and transistor circuits. (Program or materials fees may apply.) Prerequisites: ECE 35.

ECE 85. iTunes 101: A Survey of Information Technology (4)
Topics include how devices such as iPods and iPhones generate, transmit, receive, and process information (music, images, video, etc.), the relationship between technology and issues such as privacy and “net neutrality,” and current topics related to information technology. Prerequisites: none.

ECE 87. First-year Student Seminar (1)
The First-year Student Seminar program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students. Prerequisites: none.

ECE 90. Undergraduate Seminar (1)
This seminar class will provide a broad review of current research topics in both electrical engineering and computer engineering. Typical subject areas are signal processing, VLSI design, electronic materials and devices, radio astronomy, communications, and optical computing. Prerequisites: none.

ECE 100. Linear Electronic Systems (4)
Linear active circuit and system design. Topics include frequency response; use of Laplace transforms; design and stability of filters using operational amplifiers. Integrated lab and lecture involves analysis, design, simulation, and testing of circuits and systems. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: ECE 45 and ECE 65. ECE 65 may be taken concurrently.

ECE 101. Linear Systems Fundamentals (4)
Complex variables. Singularities and residues. Signal and system analysis in continuous and discrete time. Fourier series and transforms. Laplace and z-transforms. Linear Time Invariant Systems. Impulse response, frequency response, and transfer functions. Poles and zeros. Stability. Convolution. Sampling. Aliasing. Prerequisites: ECE 45. Open to EC26, EC27, EC28, EC37, and CS25 major codes only.

ECE 102. Introduction to Active Circuit Design (4)
Nonlinear active circuits design. Nonlinear device models for diodes, bipolar and field-effect transistors. Linearization of device models and small-signal equivalent circuits. Circuit designs will be simulated by computer and tested in the laboratory. Prerequisites: ECE 65 and ECE 100. ECE 100 can be taken concurrently. 

ECE 103. Fundamentals of Devices and Materials (4)
Introduction to semiconductor materials and devices. Semiconductor crystal structure, energy bands, doping, carrier statistics, drift and diffusion, p-n junctions, metal-semiconductor junctions. Bipolar junction transistors: current flow, amplification, switching, nonideal behavior. Metal-oxide-semiconductor structures, MOSFETs, device scaling. Prerequisites: ECE 65 and PHYS 2D or PHYS 4D and 4E.

ECE 107. Electromagnetism (4)
Electrostatics and magnetostatics; electrodynamics; Maxwell’s equations; plane waves; skin effect. Electromagnetics of transmission lines: reflection and transmission at discontinuities, Smith chart, pulse propagation, dispersion. Rectangular waveguides. Dielectric and magnetic properties of materials. Electromagnetics of circuits. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A–C or 4A–C and ECE 45.

ECE 108. Digital Circuits (4)
A transistor-level view of digital integrated circuits. CMOS combinational logic, ratioed logic, noise margins, rise and fall delays, power dissipation, transmission gates. Short channel MOS model, effects on scaling. Sequential circuits, memory and array logic circuits. Three hours of lecture, one hour of discussion, three hours of laboratory. Prerequisites: ECE 25 or CSE 140, 45, and ECE 30 or CSE 30.

ECE 109. Engineering Probability and Statistics (4)
Axioms of probability, conditional probability, theorem of total probability, random variables, densities, expected values, characteristic functions, transformation of random variables, central limit theorem. Random number generation, engineering reliability, elements of estimation, random sampling, sampling distributions, tests for hypothesis. One unit of credit given if taken after MAE 108, MATH 180A, MATH 180B, MATH 183, MATH 186, or ECON 120A. Prerequisites: MATH 20A-B, MATH 20D, MATH 20C or MATH 31BH, and MATH 31AH or MATH 18.

ECE 111. Advanced Digital Design Project (4)
Advanced topics in digital circuits and systems. Use of computers and design automation tools. Hazard elimination, synchronous/asynchronous FSM synthesis, synchronization and arbitration, pipelining and timing issues. Problem sets and design exercises. A large-scale design project. Simulation and/or rapid prototyping. Prerequisites: ECE 25 or CSE 140.

ECE 115. Fast Prototyping (4)
Lab-based course. Students will learn how to prototype a mechatronic solution. Topics include cheap/accessible materials and parts; suppliers; fast prototyping techniques; useful electronic sketches and system integration shortcuts. Students will learn to materialize their electromechanical ideas and make design decisions to minimize cost, improve functionality/robustness. Labs will culminate toward a fully functional robot prototype for demonstration. Prerequisites: ECE 16 or consent of instructor.

ECE 118. Computer Interfacing (4)
Interfacing computers and embedded controllers to the real world: busses, interrupts, DMA, memory mapping, concurrency, digital I/O, standards for serial and parallel communications, A/D, D/A, sensors, signal conditioning, video, and closed loop control. Students design and construct an interfacing project. (Course materials and/or program fees may apply.) Prerequisites: ECE 30 or CSE 30 and ECE 35, 45, 65.

ECE 121A. Power Systems Analysis and Fundamentals (4)
This course introduces concepts of large-scale power system analysis: electric power generation, distribution, steady-state analysis and economic operation. It provides the fundamentals for advanced courses and engineering practice on electric power systems, smart grid, and electricity economics. The course requires implementing some of the computational techniques in simulation software. Prerequisites: ECE 35.

ECE 121B. Energy Conversion (4)
Principles of electro-mechanical energy conversion, balanced three-phase systems, fundamental concepts of magnetic circuits, single-phase transformers, and the steady-state performance of DC and induction machines. Students may not receive credit for both ECE 121B and ECE 121. Prerequisites: ECE 121A.

ECE 123. Antenna Systems Engineering (4)
The electromagnetic and systems engineering of radio antennas for terrestrial wireless and satellite communications. Antenna impedance, beam pattern, gain, and polarization. Dipoles, monopoles, paraboloids, phased arrays. Power and noise budgets for communication links. Atmospheric propagation and multipath. Prerequisites: ECE 107 with a grade of C– or better.

ECE 124. Motor Drives (4)
Topics include the operation of DC motor and induction machine drives in steady state and speed control of DC and induction motor drives in an energy efficient manner using power electronics. Control techniques such as vector control and direct torque control (DTC) of induction machines. Different control methods for direct current motors using different types of power converters, such as DC-DC and AC-DC converters. Design torque, speed, and position controller of DC motor drive. Prerequisites: ECE 121B and ECE 125A.

ECE 125A. Introduction to Power Electronics I (4)
Power generation, system, and electronics. Topics include power semiconductor devices and characteristics, single-phase and three-phase half and full controlled AC-to-DC rectifiers, nonisolated/isolated DC-DC converters, power loss calculation, and thermal considerations, Snubber circuits. Prerequisites: ECE 121A.

ECE 125B. Introduction to Power Electronics II (4)
Design and control of DC-DC converters, PWM rectifiers, single-phase and three-phase inverters, power management, and power electronics applications in renewable energy systems, motion control, and lighting. Prerequisites: ECE 125A.

ECE 128A. Real World Power Grid Operation (4)
Provides practical insights into the operation of the power grid. Covers the same subjects that actual power system operators’ certification course covers. It systematically describes the vital grid operators’ functions and the processes required to operate the system. Uses actual case histories, and real examples of best in-class approaches from across the nation and the globe. Presents the problems encountered by operators and the enabling solutions to remedy them. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

ECE 128B. Power Grid Modernization (4)
In-depth coverage of the future power grids. Covers the practical aspects of the technologies, their design and system implementation. Topics include the changing nature of the grid with renewable resources, smart meters, synchrophasors (PMU), microgrids, distributed energy resources, and the associated information and communications infrastructures. Presents actual examples and best practices. Students will be provided with various tools.

ECE 128C. Power Grid Resiliency to Adverse Effects (4)
This course offers unique insight and practical answers through examples, of how power systems can be affected by weather and what/how countermeasures can be applied to mitigate them to make the system more resilient. Detailed explanations of the impacts of extreme weather and applicable industry standards and initiatives. Proven practices for successful restoration of the power grid, increased system resiliency, and ride-through after extreme weather providing real examples from around the globe.

ECE 129. Renewable and Energy Storage Resources (4)
Provides a solid foundation to renewable energy resources such as hydroelectric, solar, wind, geothermal, wave, and tidal. Energy grid storage systems. Presents lessons learned from actual systems and study of renewable energy resources and energy storage systems. Presents lessons learned from actual systems and results of detailed studies on the applications of renewable energy resources and energy storage systems. Industry tools for hands-on experience with such resources and systems will be provided. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

ECE 134. Electronic Materials Science of Integrated Circuits (4)
Electronic materials science with emphasis on topics pertinent to microelectronics and VLSI technology. Concept of the course is to use components in integrated circuits to discuss structure, thermodynamics, reaction kinetics, and electrical properties of materials. Prerequisites: PHYS 2C–D with grades of C– or better.

ECE 135A. Semiconductor Physics (4)
Crystal structure and quantum theory of solids; electronic band structure; review of carrier statistics, drift and diffusion, p-n junctions; nonequilibrium carriers, imrefs, traps, recombination, etc.; metal-semiconductor junctions and heterojunctions. Prerequisites: ECE 103 with a grade of C– or better.

ECE 135B. Electronic Devices (4)
Structure and operation of bipolar junction transistors, junction field-effect transistors, metal-oxide-semiconductor diodes and transistors. Analysis of dc and ac characteristics. Charge control model of dynamic behavior. Prerequisites: ECE 135A with a grade of C– or better.

ECE 136L. Microelectronics Laboratory (4)
Laboratory fabrication of diodes and field-effect transistors covering photolithography, oxidation, diffusion, thin film deposition, etching and evaluation of devices. (Course materials and/or program fees may apply.) Prerequisites: ECE 135B.

ECE 138L. Microstructuring Processing Technology Laboratory (4)
A laboratory course covering the concept and practice of microstructuring science and technology in fabricating devices relevant to sensors, lab-chips and related devices. (Course materials and/or program fees may apply.) Prerequisites: upper-division standing for science and engineering students.

ECE 139. Semiconductor Device Design and Modeling (4)
This course is designed to provide a general background of semiconductor material, semiconductor device, circuit modeling and design based on fundamental physics, semiconductor physics, and device physics. Acquire the fundamental knowledge and technique to use material, device, mixed-mode, and circuit simulations. Recommended preparation: ECE 135A-B.

ECE 140A. The Art of Product Engineering I (4)
Building on a solid foundation of electrical and computer engineer skills, this course strives to broaden student skills in software, full-stack engineering, and concrete understanding of methods related to the realistic development of a commercial product. Students will research, design, and develop an IOT device to serve an emerging market. Prerequisites: CSE 8B or CSE 11 or ECE 15.

ECE 140B. The Art of Product Engineering II (4)
Building on a solid foundation of electrical and computer engineer skills, this course strives to broaden student skills in software, full-stack engineering, and concrete understanding of methods related to the realistic development of a commercial product. Students will research, design, and develop an IOT device to serve an emerging market. Prerequisites: ECE 140A.

ECE 141A. Software Foundations I (4)
Software analysis, design, and development. Data structures, algorithms, and design and development idioms in C++. Students will gain broad experience using object-oriented methods and design patterns. Through increasingly difficult challenges, students will gain valuable real-world experience building, testing, and debugging software, and develop a robust mental model of modern software design and architecture. Prerequisites: ECE 17 and CSE 30 or ECE 30.

ECE 141B. Software Foundations II (4)
ECE 141B builds upon the solid C++ foundation of ECE 141A. Students will model and build a working database management solution in C++. Topics include STL, design patterns, parsing, searching and sorting, algorithmic thinking, and design partitioning. The course will continue to explore best practices in software development, debugging, and testing. Prerequisites: ECE 141A.

ECE 143. Programming for Data Analysis (4)
This course covers the fundamentals of using the Python language effectively for data analysis. Students learn the underlying mechanics and implementation specifics of Python and how to effectively utilize the many built-in data structures and algorithms. The course introduces key modules for data analysis such as Numpy, Pandas, and Matplotlib. Participants learn to leverage and navigate the vast Python ecosystem to find codes and communities of individual interest. Prerequisites: ECE 16.

ECE 144. LabVIEW Programming: Design and Applications (4)
Develop, debug, and test LabVIEW VIs, solve problems using LabVIEW, use data acquisition, and perform signal processing and instrument control in LabVIEW applications. Groups of students will build an elevator system from laser-cut and 3-D printed parts; integrate sensors, motors, and servos; and program using state-machine architecture in LabVIEW. Students will have the opportunity to take the National Instruments Certified LabVIEW Associate Developer (CLAD) exam at the end of the quarter. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: CSE 11 or CSE 8B or ECE 15.

ECE 145AL-BL-CL. Acoustics Laboratory (4-4-4)
Automated laboratory based on H-P GPIB controlled instruments. Software controlled data collection and analysis. Vibrations and waves in strings and bars of electromechanical systems and transducers. Transmissions, reflection, and scattering of sound waves in air and water. Aural and visual detection. Prerequisites: ECE 107 with a grade of C– or better or consent of instructor.

ECE 148. Introduction to Autonomous Vehicles (4)
This course introduces students to the fundamentals of autonomous vehicles using an accelerated and engaging engineering curriculum leveraging the educational benefits of robotics “coopertition” (cooperative competition). Students work in small teams building scale cars utilizing best engineering practices. Skills to be learned include fast prototyping, project management, traditional programming, and computer vision using Robot Operating System (ROS) and artificial intelligence deep learning. Cross-listed with MAE 148. Students may not receive credit for ECE 148 and MAE 148. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: ECE 15 or ECE 35 or MAE 2 or MAE 3, and consent of instructor.

ECE 150. Entrepreneurship for Engineers (4)
A foundation course teaching the basics of starting and running a successful new business. Students learn how to think like entrepreneurs, pivot their ideas to match customer needs, and assess financial, market, and timeline feasibility. The end goal is an investor pitch and a business plan. Provides experiential education, encouragement, and coaching (“E3CE”) that prepares students for successful careers at start-up as well as large companies. Students may not receive credit for both ECE 150 and CSE 175. Counts toward one professional elective only. Prerequisites: students must apply to enroll in order to gauge their past experience with and interest in entrepreneurship. Consent of instructor is required.

ECE 153. Probability and Random Processes for Engineers (4)
Random processes. Stationary processes: correlation, power spectral density. Gaussian processes and linear transformation of Gaussian processes. Point processes. Random noise in linear systems. Prerequisites: ECE 109 with a grade of C– or better.

ECE 155. Digital Communications Theory (4)
Design and performance analysis of digital modulation techniques, including probability of error results for PSK, DPSK, and FSK. Introduction to effects of intersymbol interference and fading. Detection and estimation theory, including optimal receiver design and maximum-likelihood parameter estimation. Renumbered from ECE 154B. Students may not receive credit for ECE 155 and ECE 154B. Prerequisites: ECE 101 or BENG 122A, ECE 109 or ECON 120A or MAE 108 or MATH 180A or MATH 180B or MATH 183 or MATH 186, and ECE 153.

ECE 156. Sensor Networks (4)
Characteristics of chemical, biological, seismic, and other physical sensors; signal processing techniques supporting distributed detection of salient events; wireless communication and networking protocols supporting formation of robust sensor fabrics; current experience with low power, low cost sensor deployments. Undergraduate students must take a final exam; graduate students must write a term paper or complete a final project. Cross-listed with MAE 149 and SIO 238. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and consent of instructor, or graduate student in science and engineering.

ECE 157A. Communications Systems Laboratory I (4)
Experiments in the modulation and demodulation of baseband and passband signals. Statistical characterization of signals and impairments. (Course materials and/or program fees may apply.) Prerequisites: ECE 109 or ECON 120A or MAE 108 or MATH 180A or MATH 180B or MATH 183 or MATH 186 and ECE 161A.

ECE 157B. Communications Systems Laboratory II (4)
Advanced projects in communication systems. Students will plan and implement design projects in the laboratory, updating progress weekly and making plan/design adjustments based upon feedback. Prerequisites: ECE 157A or ECE 161A.

ECE 158A. Data Networks I (4)
Layered network architectures, data link control protocols and multiple-access systems, performance analysis. Flow control; prevention of deadlock and throughput degradation. Routing, centralized and decentralized schemes, static dynamic algorithms. Shortest path and minimum average delay algorithms. Comparisons. Prerequisites: ECE 109 with a grade of C– or better.

ECE 158B. Data Networks II (4)
Layered network architectures, data link control protocols and multiple-access systems, performance analysis. Flow control; prevention of deadlock and throughput degradation. Routing, centralized and decentralized schemes, static dynamic algorithms. Shortest path and minimum average delay algorithms. Comparisons. Prerequisites: ECE 158A with a grade of C– or better.

ECE 159. Introduction to Data Processing and Information Theory (4)
Introduction to information theory and coding, including entropy, average mutual information, channel capacity, block codes, and convolutional codes. Renumbered from ECE 154C. Students may not receive credit for ECE 159 and ECE 154C. Prerequisites: ECE 153.

ECE 161A. Introduction to Digital Signal Processing (4)
Review of discrete-time systems and signals, Discrete-Time Fourier Transform and its properties, the Fast Fourier Transform, design of Finite Impulse Response (FIR) and Infinite Impulse Response (IIR) filters, implementation of digital filters. Prerequisites: ECE 101.

ECE 161B. Digital Signal Processing I (4)
Sampling and quantization of baseband signals; A/D and D/A conversion, quantization noise, oversampling and noise shaping. Sampling of bandpass signals, undersampling downconversion, and Hilbert transforms. Coefficient quantization, roundoff noise, limit cycles and overflow oscillations. Insensitive filter structures, lattice and wave digital filters. Systems will be designed and tested with MATLAB, implemented with DSP processors and tested in the laboratory. Prerequisites: ECE 161A with a grade of C– or better.

ECE 161C. Applications of Digital Signal Processing (4)
This course discusses several applications of DSP. Topics covered will include speech analysis and coding; image and video compression and processing. A class project is required, algorithms simulated by MATLAB. Prerequisites: ECE 161A.

ECE 163. Electronic Circuits and Systems (4)
Analysis and design of analog circuits and systems. Feedback systems with applications to operational amplifier circuits. Stability, sensitivity, bandwidth, compensation. Design of active filters. Switched capacitor circuits. Phase-locked loops. Analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog conversion. (Course materials and/or program fees may apply.) Prerequisites: ECE 101 and 102 with grades of C– or better.

ECE 164. Analog Integrated Circuit Design (4)
Design of linear and nonlinear analog integrated circuits including operational amplifiers, voltage regulators, drivers, power stages, oscillators, and multipliers. Use of feedback and evaluation of noise performance. Parasitic effects of integrated circuit technology. Laboratory simulation and testing of circuits. Prerequisites: ECE 102 with a grade of C– or better. ECE 163 recommended.

ECE 165. Digital Integrated Circuit Design (4)
VLSI digital systems. Circuit characterization, performance estimation, and optimization. Circuits for alternative logic styles and clocking schemes. Subsystems include ALUs, memory, processor arrays, and PLAs. Techniques for gate arrays, standard cell, and custom design. Design and simulation using CAD tools. Prerequisites: ECE 102.

ECE 166. Microwave Systems and Circuits (4)
Waves, distributed circuits, and scattering matrix methods. Passive microwave elements. Impedance matching. Detection and frequency conversion using microwave diodes. Design of transistor amplifiers including noise performance. Circuits designs will be simulated by computer and tested in the laboratory. (Course materials and/or program fees may apply.) Prerequisites: ECE 102 and 107 with grades of C– or better.

ECE 171A. Linear Control System Theory (4)
Stability of continuous- and discrete-time single-input/single-output linear time-invariant control systems emphasizing frequency domain methods. Transient and steady-state behavior. Stability analysis by root locus, Bode, Nyquist, and Nichols plots. Compensator design. Prerequisites: ECE 45. Open to EC26, EC27, EC28, and EC37 major codes only.

ECE 171B. Linear Control System Theory (4)
Time-domain, state-variable formulation of the control problem for both discrete-time and continuous-time linear systems. State-space realizations from transfer function system description. Internal and input-output stability, controllability/observability, minimal realizations, and pole-placement by full-state feedback. Prerequisites: ECE 171A with a grade of C– or better.

ECE 172A. Introduction to Intelligent Systems: Robotics and Machine Intelligence (4)
This course will introduce basic concepts in machine perception. Topics covered will include edge detection, segmentation, texture analysis, image registration, and compression. Prerequisites: ECE 101 with a grade of C– or better. ECE 109 recommended.

ECE 174. Introduction to Linear and Nonlinear Optimization with Applications (4)
The linear least squares problem, including constrained and unconstrained quadratic optimization and the relationship to the geometry of linear transformations. Introduction to nonlinear optimization. Applications to signal processing, system identification, robotics, and circuit design. Recommended preparation: ECE 143 (for Python) or equivalent proficiency in MATLAB programming. Prerequisites: MATH 18 or MATH 31AH and ECE 15.

ECE 175A. Elements of Machine Intelligence: Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (4)
Introduction to pattern recognition and machine learning. Decision functions. Statistical pattern classifiers. Generative vs. discriminant methods for pattern classification. Feature selection. Regression. Unsupervised learning. Clustering. Applications of machine learning. Prerequisites: ECE 109 and ECE 174.

ECE 175B. Elements of Machine Intelligence: Probabilistic Reasoning and Graphical Models (4)
Bayes’ rule as a probabilistic reasoning engine; graphical models as knowledge encoders; conditional independence and D-Separation; Markov random fields; inference in graphical models; sampling methods and Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC); sequential data and the Viterbi and BCJR algorithms; The Baum-Welsh algorithm for Markov Chain parameter estimation. Prerequisites: ECE 175A.

ECE 176. Introduction to Deep Learning and Applications (4)
This course covers the fundamentals in deep learning, basics in deep neural network including different network architectures (e.g., ConvNet, RNN), and the optimization algorithms for training these networks. We will have hands-on implementation courses in PyTorch. This course will also introduce the deep learning applications in computer vision, robotics, and sequence modeling in natural language processing. Prerequisites: MATH 18 or MATH 31AH, or consent of instructor.

ECE 180. Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering (4)
Topics of special interest in electrical and computer engineering. Subject matter will not be repeated so it may be taken for credit more than once. Prerequisites: consent of instructor; department stamp.

ECE 181. Physical Optics and Fourier Optics (4)
Ray optics, wave optics, beam optics, Fourier optics, and electromagnetic optics. Ray transfer matrix, matrices of cascaded optics, numerical apertures of step and graded index fibers. Fresnel and Fraunhofer diffractions, interference of waves. Gaussian and Bessel beams, the ABCD law for transmissions through arbitrary optical systems. Spatial frequency, impulse response and transfer function of optical systems, Fourier transform and imaging properties of lenses, holography. Wave propagation in various (inhomogeneous, dispersive, anisotropic or nonlinear) media. (Course materials and/or program fees may apply.) Prerequisites: ECE 103 and 107 with grades of C– or better.

ECE 182. Electromagnetic Optics, Guided-Wave, and Fiber Optics (4)
Polarization optics: crystal optics, birefringence. Guided-wave optics: modes, losses, dispersion, coupling, switching. Fiber optics: step and graded index, single and multimode operation, attenuation, dispersion, fiber optic communications. Resonator optics. (Course materials and/or program fees may apply.) Prerequisites: ECE 103 and 107 with grades of C– or better.

ECE 183. Optical Electronics (4)
Quantum electronics, interaction of light and matter in atomic systems, semiconductors. Laser amplifiers and laser systems. Photodetection. Electro-optics and acousto-optics, photonic switching. Fiber optic communication systems. Labs: semiconductor lasers, semiconductor photodetectors. (Course materials and/or program fees may apply.) Prerequisites: ECE 103 and 107 with grades of C– or better.

ECE 184. Optical Information Processing and Holography (4)
(Conjoined with ECE 241AL) Labs: optical holography, photorefractive effect, spatial filtering, computer generated holography. Students enrolled in ECE 184 will receive four units of credit; students enrolled in ECE 241AL will receive two units of credit. (Course materials and/or program fees may apply.) Prerequisites: ECE 182 with a grade of C– or better.

ECE 185. Lasers and Modulators (4)
(Conjoined with ECE 241BL) Labs: CO2 laser, HeNe laser, electro-optic modulation, acousto-optic modulation, spatial light modulators. Students enrolled in ECE 185 will receive four units of credit; students enrolled in ECE 241BL will receive two units of credit. (Course materials and/or program fees may apply.) Prerequisites: ECE 183 with a grade of C– or better.

ECE 187. Introduction to Biomedical Imaging and Sensing (4)
Image processing fundamentals: imaging theory, image processing, pattern recognition; digital radiography, computerized tomography, nuclear medicine imaging, nuclear magnetic resonance imaging, ultrasound imaging, microscopy imaging. Prerequisites: MATH 20A-B-F, 20C or 21C, 20D or 21D, PHYS 2A–D, ECE 101 (may be taken concurrently) with grades of C– or better.

ECE 188. Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering with Laboratory (4)
Topics of special interest in electrical and computer engineering with laboratory. Subject matter will not be repeated so it may be taken for credit up to three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

ECE 189. Technical Public Speaking (2)
Basics of technical public speaking, including speech organization, body language (eye contact, hand gestures, etc.), volume and rate, and design of technical slides. Students will practice technical public speaking, including speeches with PowerPoint slides and speaker introductions, and presenting impromptu speeches. Students may not receive credit for both ECE 189 and ENG 100E. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

ECE 190. Engineering Design (4)
Students complete a project comprising at least 50 percent or more engineering design to satisfy the following features: student creativity, open-ended formulation of a problem statement/specifications, consideration of alternative solutions/realistic constraints. Written final report required. Prerequisites: students enrolling in this course must have completed all of the breadth courses and one depth course. The department stamp is required to enroll in ECE 190. (Specifications and enrollment forms are available in the undergraduate office.)

ECE 191. Engineering Group Design Project (4)
Groups of students work to design, build, demonstrate, and document an engineering project. All students give weekly progress reports of their tasks and contribute a section to the final project report. Prerequisites: completion of all of the breadth courses and one depth course.

ECE 193H. Honors Project (4–8)
An advanced reading or research project performed under the direction of an ECE faculty member. Must contain enough design to satisfy the ECE program’s four-unit design requirement. Must be taken for a letter grade. May extend over two quarters with a grade assigned at completion for both quarters. Prerequisites: admission to the ECE departmental honors program.

ECE 194. Viacar Design Project (4)
Students design, build, and race an autonomous car using principles in electrical engineering and computer science: circuit design, control theory, digital signal processing, embedded systems, microcontrollers, electromagnetism, and programming. Prerequisites: none.

ECE 195. Teaching (2 or 4)
Teaching and tutorial activities associated with courses and seminars. Not more than four units of ECE 195 may be used for satisfying graduation requirements. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of the department chair.

ECE 196. Engineering Hands-on Group Project (4)
Groups of students work to build and demonstrate at least three engineering projects at the beginning, intermediate, and advanced levels. The final project consists of either a new project designed by the student team or extension of an existing project. The student teams also prepare a manual as part of their documentation of the final project. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: BENG 1 or CENG 4 or CSE 11 or CSE 8B or ECE 5 or MAE 3 or NANO 4 or SE 1.

ECE 197. ECE Internship (2, 4, 6, 8, 10, or 12)
An enrichment program that provides work experience with public/private section employers. Subject to the availability of positions, students will work in a local company under the supervision of a faculty member and site supervisor. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: minimum UC San Diego 2.5 GPA. Consent of instructor and department stamp.

ECE 198. Directed Group Study (1, 2, 3, or 4)
Topics in electrical and computer engineering whose study involves reading and discussion by a small group of students under direction of a faculty member. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

ECE 199. Independent Study for Undergraduates in Electrical & Computer Engineering (2 or 4)
Independent reading or research by special arrangement with a faculty member. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

MAE 02. Introduction to Aerospace Engineering (4)
An introduction to topics in aeronautical and astronautical engineering including aerodynamics, propulsion, flight mechanics, structures, materials, orbital mechanics, design, mission planning, and environments. General topics include historical background, career opportunities, engineering ethics, and professionalism. Prerequisites: none.

MAE 03. Introduction to Mechanical Design (4)
Introduction to design process through hands-on individual and team projects. Topics include 2D/3D CAD (drawing projections/isometrics, dimensioning), design problem identification, prototype fabrication techniques (shop skills, rapid prototyping), design process (concept generation/selection, risk reduction strategies, scheduling), learning from hardware performance (problem solving/redesign), teamwork. Use of components: fasteners, couplings, DC motors, oral/written communication with graphics. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A or 4A. Enrollment restricted to BE 25, MC 25, MC 27, MC 29, and MC 30–37 majors only.

MAE 05. Quantitative Computer Skills (4)
Introductory course for nonengineering majors. Use of computers in solving problems; applications from life sciences, physical sciences, and engineering. Students run existing computer programs and complete some programming in BASIC. Prerequisites: none.

MAE 07. Spatial Visualization (1)
(Cross-listed with SE 7.) Spatial visualization is the ability to manipulate 2-D and 3-D shapes in one’s mind. In this course, students will perform exercises that increase their spatial visualization skills. P/NP grades only. Students may not receive credit for SE 7 and MAE 7. Prerequisites: none.

MAE 08. MATLAB Programming for Engineering Analysis (4)
Computer programming in MATLAB with elementary numerical analysis of engineering problems. Arithmetic and logical operations, arrays, graphical presentation of computations, symbolic mathematics, solutions of equations, and introduction to data structures. Prerequisites: MATH 20A and 20B or consent of instructor.

MAE 11. Thermodynamics (4)
Fundamentals of engineering thermodynamics: energy, work, heat, properties of pure substances, first and second laws for closed systems and control volumes, gas mixtures. Application to engineering systems, power and refrigeration cycles, combustion. Renumbered from MAE 110A. Students may not receive credit for MAE 11 and MAE 110A. Prerequisites: PHYS 2C and CHEM 6A. Enrollment restricted to engineering majors only.

MAE 20. Elements of Materials Science (4)
The structure of materials: metals, ceramics, glasses, semiconductors, superconductors, and polymers to produce desired, useful properties. Atomic structures. Defects in materials, phase diagrams, microstructural control. Mechanical and electrical properties are discussed. Time temperature transformation diagrams. Diffusion. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A or 4A, CHEM 6A or CHEM 6AH, and MATH 20C.

MAE 21. Aerospace Materials Science (4)
Atomic structure and physical properties of engineering materials including metals, ceramics, glasses, polymers, and composite materials. Defects and phase diagram of materials. Material testing and processing. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A or 4A, CHEM 6A or CHEM 6AH, and MATH 20B. Enrollment restricted to MC 25 majors only.

MAE 30A. Statics and Introduction to Dynamics (4)
Statics: statics of particles and rigid bodies in 3-D. Free body diagrams. Moment of a force, couples, equivalent systems of forces. Distributed forces, centroids, and centers of gravity. Introduction to dynamics: 3-D relative motion, kinematics, and kinetics of particles. Newton’s equations of motion. Equilibrium problems with friction. Enrollment restricted to engineering majors MC 25, MC 27, MC 29, MC 30–34, and SE 27. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A and MATH 31BH or MATH 20C.

MAE 30B. Dynamics and Vibrations (4)
Dynamics: energy methods for motion of particles and rigid bodies, including virtual work, power, and Lagrange’s equations. Impact and impulses. Systems of particles. Introduction to 3-D dynamics of rigid bodies. Introduction to vibrations: free and harmonically forced vibrations of undamped and damped single degree of freedom systems. Enrollment restricted to engineering majors only MC 25, MC 27, MC 29, MC 30–34, and SE 27. Prerequisites: MAE 30A.

MAE 40. Linear Circuits (4)
Steady-state and dynamic behavior of linear, lumped-parameter electrical circuits. Kirchhoff’s laws. RLC circuits. Node and mesh analysis. Operational amplifiers. Signal acquisition and conditioning. Electric motors. Design applications in engineering. Prerequisites: MATH 20D and MATH 31AH or MATH 18 or MATH 20F, and PHYS 2B.

MAE 87. First-year Student Seminar (1)
The First-year Student Seminar program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges. Topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students. Prerequisites: none.

MAE 92A. Design Competition—Design, Build, and Fly Aircraft (1)
(Cross-listed with SE 10A.) Student teams design, build, and fly unmanned aircraft for a national student competition. Students concentrate on vehicle system design including aerodynamics, structures, propulsion, and performance. Teams engineering, fabricate the aircraft, submit a design report, and prep aircraft for competition. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

MAE 93. Design Competition—Design, Build, and Test Race Car (1)
Student teams design, build, and test a formula-style racing car for an international student competition. Students concentrate on vehicle system analysis and design, manufacturability and performance. Teams engineer, fabricate car, submit a design report and prep car for competition. Prerequisites: department approval.

MAE 94. Rocketry Competitions—Design and Build Rockets and Space Systems (1)
Student teams design, build, and test different components of rockets and cubesats for national level competitions. Students will be involved in planning, designing, manufacturing, and testing various systems. Team engineers will focus on the feasibility of manufacturing and performance for the targeted competitions. Final design reports will be prepared by the teams.

MAE 98. Directed Group Study in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering (2)
Directed group study on a topic or in a field not included in the regular departmental curriculum. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit two times. Credit may not be received for a course numbered 97, 98, or 99 subsequent to receiving credit for a course numbered 197, 198, or 199. Prerequisites: department approval. 

MAE 99H. Independent Study in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering (1)
Independent study or research under direction of a member of the faculty. Prerequisites: student must be of first-year standing and a Regent’s Scholar; approved Special Studies form.

MAE 101A. Introductory Fluid Mechanics (4)
Fluid statics; fluid kinematics; integral and differential forms of the conservation laws for mass, momentum, and energy; Bernoulli equation; potential flows; dimensional analysis and similitude. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A or 4A and MATH 20D and MATH 20E or MATH 31CH, or consent of instructor. Enrollment restricted to MC 25, MC 27, MC 29, and MC 30–34 majors only.

MAE 101B. Advanced Fluid Mechanics (4)
Laminar and turbulent flow. Pipe flow including friction factor. Boundary layers, separation, drag, and lift. Compressible flow including shock waves. Prerequisites: MAE 101A or CENG 101A, and MAE 11 or MAE 110A or CENG 102, or consent of instructor.

MAE 101C. Heat Transfer (4)
Extension of fluid mechanics in MAE 101A–B to viscous, heat-conducting flows. Application of the energy conservation equation to heat transfer in ducts and external boundary layers. Heat conduction and radiation transfer. Heat transfer coefficients in forced and free convection. Design applications. Prerequisites: MAE 101A or CENG 101A, MAE 101B, and MAE 105.

MAE 101D. Intermediate Heat Transfer (4)
Course builds on the MAE fluids sequence, offering more advanced concepts in conduction, convection, radiation, and heat exchanger design. This course covers numerical methods in conduction, boiling, condensation and evaporation analysis, natural and turbulent convection, spectral and directional radiative transfer, heatpipes, thermal design of spacecraft, heat exchanger analysis and design. Prerequisites: senior standing and MAE 101C, or consent of instructor.

MAE 104. Aerodynamics (4)
Basic relations describing flow field around wings and bodies at subsonic and supersonic speed. Thin-wing theory. Slender-body theory. Formulation of theories for evaluating forces and moments on airplane geometries. Application to the design of high-speed aircraft. Prerequisites: MAE 101A and 101B, or consent of instructor. Enrollment restricted to MC 25, MC 27, MC 29, MC 30–34, and SE 27 majors only.

MAE 105. Introduction to Mathematical Physics (4)
Fourier series, Sturm Liouville theory, elementary partial differential equations, integral transforms with applications to problems in vibration, wave motion, and heat conduction. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A and B, and MATH 20D or 21D. Enrollment restricted to engineering majors only.

MAE 107. Computational Methods in Engineering (4)
Introduction to scientific computing and algorithms; iterative methods, systems of linear equations with applications; nonlinear algebraic equations; function interpolation and differentiation and optimal procedures; data fitting and least-squares; numerical solution of ordinary differential equations. Prerequisites: MAE 8 or 9, and MATH 18 or 20F or 31AH.

MAE 108. Probability and Statistical Methods for Mechanical Engineering (4)
Probability theory, conditional probability, Bayes theorem, random variables, densities, expected values, characteristic functions, central limit theorem. Engineering reliability, elements of estimation, random sampling, sampling distributions, hypothesis testing, confidence intervals. Curve fitting and data analysis. Students cannot receive credit for MAE 108 and ECE 109, ECON 120A, MATH 180A, MATH 183, MATH 186, or SE 125. Prerequisites: MATH 18 or 20F.

MAE 110. Thermodynamic Systems (4)
Thermodynamic analysis of power cycles with application to combustion driven engines: internal combustion, diesel, and gas turbines. Thermodynamics of mixtures and chemical and phase equilibrium. Computational methods for calculating chemical equilibrium. Renumbered from MAE 110B. Students may not receive credit for MAE 110 and MAE 110B. Prerequisites: MAE 11 or 110A. (Course not offered every year.)

MAE 113. Fundamentals of Propulsion (4)
Compressible flow, thermodynamics, and combustion relevant to aircraft and space vehicle propulsion. Analysis and design of components for gas turbines, including turbines, inlets, combustion chambers and nozzles. Fundamentals of rocket propulsion. Prerequisites: MAE 11 or MAE 110A or CENG 102, and MAE 101A or CENG 101A, and MAE 101B or CENG 101C. Enrollment restricted to MC 25, MC 27, MC 29, and MC 30–34 majors only.

MAE 114. Space Propulsion (4)
This course covers the fundamentals of rocket propulsion and discusses advanced concepts in space propulsion. Topics include liquid and solid propellant rocket engines, electrical rocket propulsion, nuclear propulsion devices, solar-powered vehicles, and current challenges and opportunities in launch vehicle technologies. Prerequisites: MAE 113.

MAE 117A. Elementary Plasma Physics (4)
(Cross-listed with Physics 151.) Particle motions, plasmas as fluids, waves, diffusion, equilibrium and stability, nonlinear effects, controlled fusion. Recommended preparation: PHYS 100B–C or ECE 107. Prerequisites: MATH 20D or 21D, or consent of instructor.

MAE 118. Introduction to Energy and Environment (4)
Overview of present-day primary energy sources and availability: fossil fuel, renewable, and nuclear; heat engines; energy conservation, transportation, air pollution, and climate change. Students may not receive credit for both MAE 118 and MAE 118A. Prerequisites: MAE 101A or CENG 101A, or consent of instructor.

MAE 119. Introduction to Renewable Energy: Solar and Wind (4)
Basic principles of solar radiation—diffuse and direct radiation; elementary solar energy engineering—solar thermal and solar photovoltaic; basic principles of wind dynamics—hydrodynamic laws, wind intermittency, Betz’s law; elementary wind energy engineering; solar and wind energy perspectives; operating the California power grid with 33 percent renewable energy sources. Students may not receive credit for both MAE 118B and MAE 119. Prerequisites: PHYS 2C or consent of instructor.

MAE 120. Introduction to Nuclear Energy (4)
Overview of basic fission and fusion processes. Elementary fission reactor physics and engineering; environmental and waste disposal issues. Survey of fusion technology issues and perspectives. May not receive credit for both MAE 118C and MAE 120. Prerequisites: MAE 101A or CENG 101A, or consent of instructor.

MAE 121. Air Pollution Transport and Dispersion Modeling (4)
Overview of air pollution and wastes and their impact. Characteristics of air pollutants. Air pollution transport. Atmospheric stability. Plume rise and dispersion. Meteorological data. Selecting the appropriate air quality model and case studies. Modeling complex terrain situations. Current air quality modeling issues. Laws and regulations to control air pollution. Prerequisites: MAE 122.

MAE 122. Flow and Transport in the Environment (4)
Introduction to the air and aquatic environments. Buoyancy, stratification, and rotation. Earth surface energy balance. Introduction to the atmospheric boundary layer. Advection and diffusion. Turbulent diffusion and dispersion in rivers and in the atmospheric boundary layer. Surface waves and internal gravity waves. Prerequisites: MAE 101A or CENG 101A, or consent of instructor.

MAE 123. Introduction to Transport in Porous Media (4)
Introduction to groundwater flow. Pollution transport through the water table. Fundamentals of flow. Single- and multi-phase flow. Darcy law. Well hydraulics. Diffusion and dispersion. Gravity currents and plumes in porous media. Chemistry of fluid-solid interactions. Fundamentals of adsorption and surface reactions. Prerequisites: MAE 105, or consent of instructor.

MAE 125. Building Energy Efficiency (4)
Physical building performance including building thermodynamics, daylighting, and solar control. Heat transfer through building envelope, solar geometry, and shading. Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning system design, water heating, microclimates, passive system design, energy efficient design, applicant energy use, cost estimating. Building energy codes and standards. Building design project with whole building energy simulation software. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MAE 126A. Environmental Engineering Laboratory (4)
Analysis of experiments in Environmental Engineering: Drag in a water tunnel, shading effects on solar photovoltaic, buoyant plume dispersion in a water tank, atmospheric turbulence, and others. Use of sensors and data acquisition. Laboratory report writing; error analysis; engineering ethics. Prerequisites: MAE 101A or CENG 101A; MAE 170.

MAE 126B. Environmental Engineering Design (4)
Fundamental principles of environmental design. Building a working prototype or computer model for an environmental engineering application. Work in teams to propose and design experiments and components, obtain data, complete engineering analysis, and write a report. Engineering ethics and professionalism. Prerequisites: MAE 126A.

MAE 130. Advanced Vibrations (4)
Harmonically excited vibrations. Vibration of multiple degree-of-freedom systems. Observations, including beat frequencies, static and dynamic coupling, traveling, and standing wave phenomena. Vibration of continuous systems. Hamilton’s equations. Distributed and point forces and moments in continuous systems and the generalized Dirac distribution. Response to impact and impulse excitation. Modeling continuous systems with approximate discrete models. Restricted to engineering majors only MC 25, MC 27, MC 29, MC 30–34, MO 21, SE 27. Prerequisites: MATH 18 or MATH 20F or MATH 31AH and MAE 30B or MAE 130B.

MAE 131A. Solid Mechanics I (4)
Concepts of stress and strain. Hooke’s Law. Axial loading of bars. Torsion of circular shafts. Shearing and normal stresses in beam bending. Deflections in beams. Statically determinate and indeterminate problems. Combined loading. Principal stresses and design criteria. Buckling of columns. Prerequisites: MATH 20D and MAE 30A or MAE 130A or SE 101A.

MAE 131B. Fundamentals of Solid Mechanics II (4)
Analysis of 3-D states of stress and strain. Governing equations of linear elasticity. Solution of elasticity problems in rectangular and polar coordinates. Stress concentration. Failure criteria. Torsion of noncircular and thin walled members. Energy methods. Plastic collapse and limit analysis. Prerequisites: MAE 131A or SE 110A and MAE 105. Enrollment restricted to engineering majors only.

MAE 133. Finite Element Methods in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering (4)
Development of stiffness and mass matrices based upon variational principles and application to static, dynamic, and design problems in structural and solid mechanics. Architecture of computer codes for linear and nonlinear finite element analysis. The use of general-purpose finite element codes. Prerequisites: MAE 131A or SE 110A. (Not offered every year.)

MAE 142. Dynamics and Control of Aerospace Vehicles (4)
The dynamics of vehicles in space or air are derived for analysis of the stability properties of spacecraft and aircraft. The theory of flight, lift, drag, Dutch roll and phugoid modes of aircraft are discussed. Optimal state space control theory for the design of analog and digital controllers (autopilots). Prerequisites: MAE 104 and MAE 143B or ECE 171A, or consent of instructor. Enrollment restricted to engineering majors only.

MAE 143A. Signals and Systems (4)
Dynamic modeling and vector differential equations. Concepts of state, input, output. Linearization around equilibria. Laplace transform, solutions to ODEs. Transfer functions and convolution representation of dynamic systems. Discrete signals, difference equations, z-transform. Continuous and discrete Fourier transform. Prerequisites: MATH 20D or 21D, MATH 20E, MATH 18 or 20F or 31AH, or consent of instructor.

MAE 143B. Linear Control (4)
Analysis and design of feedback systems in the frequency domain. Transfer functions. Time response specifications. PID controllers and Ziegler-Nichols tuning. Stability via Routh-Hurwitz test. Root locus method. Frequence response: Bode and Nyquist diagrams. Dynamic compensators, phase-lead and phase-lag. Actuator saturation and integrator wind-up. Prerequisites: MAE 143A or consent of instructor.

MAE 144. Embedded Control and Robotics (4)
Each student builds, models, programs, and controls an unstable robotic system built around a small Linux computer. Review/synthesis of: A) modern physical and electrical CAD. B) dynamics, signals and systems, linear circuits; PWMs, H-bridges, quadrature encoders. C) embedded Linux, C, graphical programming; multithreaded applications; bus communication to supporting ICs. D) classical control theory in both continuous-time (CT) and discrete-time (DT); interconnection of CT and DT elements. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or graduate student, and MAE 143B or BENG 122A or ECE 171A, or consent of instructor.

MAE 145. Introduction to Robotic Planning and Estimation (4)
This course is an introduction to robotic planning algorithms and programming. Topics include sensor-based planning (bug algorithms), motion planning via decomposition and search (basic search algorithms on graphs, A*), the configuration-space concept, free configuration spaces via sampling, collision detection algorithms, (optimal) planning via sampling (probabilistic trees), environment roadmaps, and filtering for robot localization and environment mapping (SLAM). Prerequisites: MAE 8, MAE 108, and senior standing or consent of instructor.

MAE 146. Introduction to Machine Learning Algorithms (4)
An introduction to the principles used to design and implement machine learning algorithms, as well as an understanding of their advantages and limitations. The topics covered are python review, supervised learning (linear, logistic/sigmoid regression, generalized linear models, nonlinear regression via Kernels), neural network types (convolutional, recurrent, deep NN), unsupervised learning (k-means clustering). Application of ML in different examples. Recommended preparation: ECE 143 and/or python programming knowledge. Prerequisites: (MATH 31AH or MATH 18) and (MATH 20C or MATH 31BH) and MAE 8 and (MAE 108 or ECE 109 or SE 125 or MATH 186 or MATH 183 or MATH 180A or ECON 120A).

MAE 148. Introduction to Autonomous Vehicles (4)
(Cross-listed with ECE 148.) Fundamentals of autonomous vehicles. Working in small teams, students will develop 1/8-scale autonomous cars that must perform on a simulated city track. Topics include robotics system integration, computer vision, algorithms for navigation, on-vehicle vs. off-vehicle computation, computer learning systems such as neural networks, locomotion systems, vehicle steering, dead reckoning, odometry, sensor fusion, GPS autopilot limitations, wiring, and power distribution and management. Prerequisites: ECE 15 or ECE 35 or MAE 2 or MAE 3 and department approval.

MAE 149. Sensor Networks (4)
(Cross-listed with ECE 156.) Characteristics of chemical, biological, seismic, and other physical sensors; signal processing techniques supporting distributed detection of salient events; wireless communication and networking protocols supporting formation of robust censor fabrics; current experience with low power, low-cost sensor deployments. Students may not receive credit for both MAE 149 and ECE 156. May be coscheduled with SIOC 238. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. (Not offered every year.)

MAE 150. Computational Methods for Design (4)
Computer-aided analysis and design. Design methodology, tolerance analysis, Monte Carlo analysis, kinematics and computer-aided design of linkages, design of cams and cam dynamics, design optimization, finite element analysis fundamentals, design using commercially available CAD and analysis software. Prerequisites: MAE 30A or MAE 130A or SE 101A or BENG 110, MAE 107 or SE 121, MAE 3 or MAE 2, and senior standing in engineering major, or consent of instructor.

MAE 152. Introductions to Manual and CNC Machining (1)
In this class, students are introduced to precision machining. Students will learn the proper safe operating procedures of a manual mill and lathe, band saws, and hand tools. Other topics include the basics of tolerancing, design (Fusion 360), and operation of CNC milling and turning. Program or materials fees may apply. Recommended preparation: It is recommended that students take introduction to design process through a hands-on design project course or some other introduction to shop course. Prerequisites: MAE 3.

MAE 154. Product Design and Entrepreneurship (4)
This course will teach teams of students how to develop concepts and business plans in the design of new and innovative products. Emphasis will be placed on identifying user needs, concept generation, and prototype fabrication. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and consent of instructor.

MAE 155A. Aerospace Engineering Design I (4)
Fundamental principles of aerospace vehicle design including the conceptual, preliminary, and detailed design phases. Aeronautical or astronautical design project that integrates all appropriate engineering disciplines as well as issues associated with optimization, teamwork, manufacturability, reporting, and professionalism. Prerequisites: MAE 2, MAE 21, or SE 2 or SE 104, MAE 104, MAE 30B or MAE 130C, and SE 160A, or consent of instructor.

MAE 155B. Aerospace Engineering Design II (4)
The principles of aerospace vehicle design including the conceptual, preliminary, and detailed design phases. Aeronautical or astronautical design project that integrates all appropriate engineering disciplines as well as issues associated with optimization, teamwork, manufacturability, reporting, and professionalism. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: MAE 113, MAE 142, MAE 155A, and MAE 170, or consent of instructor.

MAE 156A. Fundamental Principles of Mechanical Design I (4)
Fundamental principles of mechanical design and the design process. Application of engineering science to the design and analysis of mechanical components. Initiation of team design projects that culminate in MAE 156B with a working prototype designed for a real engineering application. Professional ethics discussed. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: MAE 3, MAE 30B, MAE 131A, MAE 150, and MAE 170, or consent of instructor. Open to major codes MC 27 and MC 30–34 only.

MAE 156B. Fundamental Principles of Mechanical Design II (4)
Fundamental principles of mechanical design and the design process. Culmination of a team design project initiated in MAE 156A which results in a working prototype designed for a real engineering application. Prerequisites: MAE 156A in the immediately preceding quarter, MAE 101C, MAE 143B, and MAE 160 or MAE 131B. Open to major codes MC 27 and MC 30–34 only.

MAE 160. Mechanical Behavior of Materials (4)
Elasticity and inelasticity, dislocations and plasticity of crystals, creep, and strengthening mechanisms. Mechanical behavior of ceramics, composites, and polymers. Fracture: mechanical and microstructural. Fatigue. Laboratory demonstrations of selected topics. Prerequisites: MAE 20, MAE 30A or MAE 130A or SE 101A, and MAE 131A, or consent of instructor.

MAE 165. Fatigue and Failure Analysis of Engineering Components (4)
The engineering and scientific aspects of crack nucleation, slow crack growth, and unstable fracture in crystalline and amorphous solids. Microstructural effects on crack initiation, fatigue crack growth and fracture toughness. Methods of fatigue testing and fracture toughness testing. Fractography and microfractography. Design safe methodologies and failure prevention. Failure analysis of real engineering structures. Prerequisites: consent of instructor. (Not offered every year.)

MAE 166. Modern Concepts in Nanotechnology (4)
(Cross-listed with NANO 156.) This course offers a worm’s eye perspective on recent developments on nanomaterials through case studies building on basic principles of synthesis techniques, processing, microstructural control, and unique physical properties of materials in nanoscale dimensions. Particular focus will be given to physical properties and technological applications of nanowires, quantum dots, and thin films. Students may not receive credit for both NANO 156 and MAE 166. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. (Not offered every year.)

MAE 167. Wave Dynamics in Materials (4)
Pressure and shear waves in infinite solids. Reflection and diffraction. Rayleigh and Love waves in semi-infinite space. Impulse load on a half space. Waveguides and group velocity. Prerequisites: consent of instructor. (Not offered every year.)

MAE 170. Experimental Techniques (4)
Principles and practice of measurement and control and the design and conduct of experiments. Technical report writing. Lectures relate to dimensional analysis, error analysis, signal-to-noise problems, filtering, data acquisition and data reduction, as well as background of experiments and statistical analysis. Experiments relate to the use of electronic devices and sensors. Prerequisites: PHYS 2C or PHYS 4B and PHYS 2CL or MAE 140 or MAE 40. Enrollment restricted to MC 25, MC 27, MC 29, MC 30–34, BE 25, BE 27.

MAE 171A. Mechanical Engineering Laboratory I (4)
Design and analysis of experiments in fluid mechanics, solid mechanics, and control engineering. Experiments in wind tunnel, water tunnel, vibration table and material testing machines, and refined electromechanical systems. Laboratory report writing; error analysis; engineering ethics. Prerequisites: MAE 101A, MAE 143B, and MAE 170. Enrollment restricted to MC 27 and MC 30–34 majors only.

MAE 171B. Mechanical Engineering Laboratory II (4)
Design and analysis of original experiments in mechanical engineering. Students research projects using experimental facilities in undergraduate laboratories: wind tunnel, water channel, vibration table, and testing machine and control systems. Students propose and design experiments, obtain data, complete engineering analysis and write a major report. Prerequisites: MAE 171A. (Not offered every year.)

MAE 175A. Aerospace Engineering Laboratory I (4)
Analysis of aerospace engineering systems using experimental facilities in undergraduate laboratories: wind tunnel, water channel, vibration table, and testing machine. Students operate facilities, obtain data, complete engineering analysis and write major reports. Prerequisites: senior standing; MAE 101C or CENG 101B; MAE 143B or CENG 120; and MAE 170, or consent of instructor.

MAE 180. Orbital Mechanics (4)
Students perform analyses based on mission requirements. Selected topics include astrodynamics, orbital motion, perturbations, coordinate systems and frames of reference, ground tracks and classification of common orbits, orbit determination, orbital maneuvers, station keeping, orbit injection and launch geometry, and interplanetary and lunar trajectories.

MAE 180A. Spacecraft Guidance I (4)
Astrodynamics, orbital motion, perturbations, coordinate systems and frames of reference. Geosynchronous orbits, station keeping. Orbital maneuvers, fuel consumption, guidance systems. Observation instrument point, tracking, control. Basic rocket dynamics. Navigation, telemetry, re-entry, and aero-assisted maneuvers. Mission design. Students perform analyses based on mission requirements. Prerequisites: upper-division standing in physics, mathematics, or engineering department.

MAE 181. Space Mission Analysis and Design (4)
Space mission concepts, architectures, and analysis. Mission geometry. Astrodynamics. Orbit and constellation design. Space environment. Payload and spacecraft design and sizing. Power sources and distribution. Thermal management. Structural design. Guidance and navigation. Space propulsion. Orbital debris and survivability. Cost modeling and risk analysis. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

MAE 182. Spacecraft Guidance and Navigation (4)
Navigational and guidance requirements for orbital, planetary, and atmospheric entry missions. Guidance systems. Observation instrument point, tracking, control. Celestial, radio, and inertial navigation schemes. Link budgets, antennas, and telemetry systems. Prerequisites: MAE 180.

MAE 184. Flight Simulation Techniques (4)
Students will develop software and methods to simulate the motion characteristics of flight vehicles. Six degree-of-freedom equations of motion will be reviewed with emphasis on computer implementation. Algorithms for data modeling, numerical integration, equilibrium, and linearization will be introduced. Three-dimensional visualization techniques will be explored for representing operator and observer viewpoints. Applications include aircraft, automobiles, and marine vessels. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

MAE 185. Computational Fluid Mechanics (4)
This course will cover numerical solutions of the compressible and incompressible Navier-Stokes equations using finite difference and finite volume discretization with a primary emphasis on programming and a secondary emphasis on application of commercial tools. Introduction to flow visualization will also be covered. Prerequisites: MAE 101B and MAE 107.

MAE 190. Topics in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering (4)
Topics of special interest in mechanical and aerospace engineering. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MAE 191. Topics in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering with Laboratory (4)
Topics of special interest in mechanical and aerospace engineering with laboratory. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MAE 197. Engineering Internship (1–12)
Students work in local industry or hospitals under faculty supervision. Units may not be applied toward graduation requirements. Salaried or unsalaried. Number of units determined by enrollment frequency. First quarter up to four units. Subsequent quarters cannot exceed one unit. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and department stamp, 2.50 overall GPA minimum, at least ninety units.

MAE 198. Directed Group Study in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering (1–4)
Directed group study on a topic or in a field not included in the regular department curriculum, by special arrangement with a faculty member. May be taken P/NP only. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

MAE 199. Independent Study for Undergraduates in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering (1–4)
Independent reading or research on a problem by special arrangement with a faculty member. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

NANO 4. Experience NanoEngineering (1) 
Introduction to NanoEngineering lab-based skills. Hands-on training and experimentation with nanofabrication techniques, integration, and analytical tools. This class is for NANO majors who are incoming first-year students, to be taken their first year. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: department approval required.

NANO 11. Introduction to NanoEngineering (4)
Introduction to NanoEngineering, including fundamental scaling laws, and an overview of nanomaterials synthesis, properties, and relevant technological applications with focus in the area of nanomedicine, energy, and advanced materials. Prerequisites: NANO 4.

NANO 15. Engineering Computation Using MATLAB (4)
Introduction to the solution of engineering problems using computational methods. Formulating problem statements, selecting algorithms, writing computer programs, and analyzing output using MATLAB. Computational problems from NanoEngineering, chemical engineering, and materials science are introduced. The course requires no prior programming skills. Cross-listed with CENG 15. Students may only receive credit for one of the following: NANO 15, NANO 15R, CENG 15, or CENG 15R.

NANO 15R. Engineering Computation Using MATLAB Online (4)
Introduction to solution of engineering problems using computational methods. Formulating problem statements, selecting algorithms, writing computer programs, and analyzing output using MATLAB. Computational problems from NanoEngineering, chemical engineering, and materials science are introduced. This is a fully online, self-paced course that utilizes multi-platform instructional techniques (video, text, and instructional coding environments). The course requires no prior programming skills. Cross-listed with CENG 15R. Students may only receive credit for one of the following: NANO 15, NANO 15R, CENG 15, or CENG 15R.

NANO 20L. Introduction to Nanomaterials Synthesis Lab (1)
Lab-based course to introduce the chemical synthesis of nanomaterials. Hands-on training in chemical synthesis and basic characterization tools. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: NANO 4. 

NANO 100L. Physical Properties of Materials Lab (4)
Experimental investigation of physical properties of materials such as: thermal expansion coefficient, thermal conductivity, glass transitions in polymers, resonant vibrational response, longitudinal and shear acoustic wave speeds, Curie temperatures, UV-VIS absorption and reflection. Prerequisites: NANO 108.

NANO 101. Introduction to NanoEngineering (4)
Introduction to NanoEngineering; nanoscale fabrication: nanolithography and self-assembly; characterization tools; nanomaterials and nanostructures: nanotubes, nanowires, nanoparticles, and nanocomposites; nanoscale and molecular electronics; nanotechnology in magnetic systems; nanotechnology in integrative systems; nanoscale optoelectronics; nanobiotechnology: biomimetic systems, nanomotors, nanofluidics, and nanomedicine. Priority enrollment given to NanoEngineering majors. Prerequisites: NANO 4, CHEM 6B, PHYS 2B, MATH 20C, and CENG 15 or CENG 15R or NANO 15 or NANO 15R or MAE 8. Restricted to major code NA25.

NANO 102. Foundations in NanoEngineering: Chemical Principles (4)
Chemical and biochemical principles tailored to nanotechnologies. Chemical interactions, classical and statistical thermodynamics of small systems, diffusion, carbon-based nanomaterials, supramolecular chemistry, colloid and polymer chemistry, lipid vesicles, surface functionalization, catalysis, biomolecular interactions, and signal pathways. Priority enrollment given to NanoEngineering majors. Prerequisites: CHEM 6C. Restricted to NanoEngineering majors or by department approval.

NANO 103. Foundations in NanoEngineering: Biochemical Principles (4)
Principles of biochemistry tailored to nanotechnologies. The structure and function of biomolecules and their specific roles in molecular interactions and signal pathways. Detection methods at the micro and nano scales. Prerequisites: BILD 1, CHEM 6C, NANO 101, and NANO 102. Department approval required; Priority given to NA25 majors.

NANO 104. Foundations in NanoEngineering: Physical Principles (4)
Introduction to quantum mechanics and nanoelectronics. Wave mechanics, the Schrödinger equation, free and confined electrons, band theory of solids. Nanosolids in 0D, 1D, and 2D. Application to nanoelectronic devices. Priority enrollment given to NanoEngineering majors. Prerequisites: MATH 20D and NANO 101. Department approval required.

NANO 106. Crystallography of Materials (4)
Fundamentals of crystallography, and practice of methods to study material structure and symmetry. Curie symmetries. Tensors as mathematical description of material properties and symmetry restrictions. Introduction to diffraction methods, including X-ray, neutron, and electron diffraction. Close-packed and other common structures of real-world materials. Derivative and superlattice structures. Prerequisites: MATH 20F or MATH 18.

NANO 107. Electronic Devices and Circuits for NanoEngineers (4) 
Overview of electrical devices and CMOS integrated circuits emphasizing fabrication processes, and scaling behavior. Design, and simulation of submicron CMOS circuits including amplifiers active filters digital logic, and memory circuits. Limitations of current technologies and possible impact of nanoelectronic technologies. Prerequisites: NANO 15, NANO 101, MATH 20B or MATH 20D, and PHYS 2B.

NANO 108. Materials Science and Engineering (4) 
Structure and control of materials: metals, ceramics, glasses, semiconductors, polymers to produce useful properties. Atomic structures. Defects in materials, phase diagrams, micro structural control. Mechanical, rheological, electrical, optical and magnetic properties discussed. Time temperature transformation diagrams. Diffusion. Scale dependent material properties. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

NANO 110. Molecular Modeling of Nanoscale Systems (4)
Principles and applications of molecular modeling and simulations toward NanoEngineering. Topics covered include molecular mechanics, energy minimization, statistical mechanics, molecular dynamics simulations, and Monte Carlo simulations. Students will get hands-on training in running simulations and analyzing simulation results. Prerequisites: MATH 20F or MATH 18, NANO 102, NANO 104, and NANO 15 or CENG 15 or MAE 8. Restricted to NanoEngineering majors or by department approval.

NANO 111. Characterization of NanoEngineering Systems (4)
Fundamentals and hands-on practice of methods to image, measure, and analyze materials and devices that are structured on the nanometer scale. Optical and electron microscopy; scanning probe methods; photon, ion, and electron probe methods; spectroscopic, magnetic, electrochemical, and thermal methods. Prerequisites: NANO 102.

NANO 112. Synthesis and Fabrication of NanoEngineering Systems (4)
Introduction to methods for fabricating materials and devices in NanoEngineering. Nano-particle, -vesicle, -tube, and -wire synthesis. Top-down methods including chemical vapor deposition, conventional and advanced lithography, doping, and etching. Bottom-up methods including self-assembly. Integration of heterogeneous structures into functioning devices. Prerequisites: NANO 102 and NANO 104.

NANO 114. Probability and Statistical Methods for Engineers (4)
Probability theory, conditional probability, Bayes theorem, discrete random variables, continuous random variables, expectation and variance, central limit theorem, graphical and numerical presentation of data, least squares estimation and regression, confidence intervals, testing hypotheses. Cross-listed with CENG 114. Students may not receive credit for both NANO 114 and CENG 114. Prerequisites: MATH 20F or MATH 18 and NANO 15 or CENG 15 or MAE 8.

NANO 115L. Nanoengineering Laboratory (4)
Laboratory experiments in the design, production, and integration of nanoscale components. Emphasis will be on solution phase synthesis, microfabrication tools, analytical characterization, and nanodevice fabrication. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: NANO 111.

NANO 117. Multiscale Transport (4)
Introduction to basic transport phenomena relevant to nanoscale and general materials systems, including engineering units and pressure, heat conduction and convection, momentum transport and laminar flow, and diffusion in solids and fluids. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

NANO 119. NanoEngineering System Design Seminar (1)
Seminar series focused on strategies in system design and solving engineering problems. Prerequisites: NANO 115L.

NANO 120A. NanoEngineering System Design I (4)
Principles of product design and the design process. Application and integration of technologies in the design and production of nanoscale components. Engineering economics. Initiation of team design projects to be completed in NANO 120B. Prerequisites: NANO 110.

NANO 120B. NanoEngineering System Design II (4)
Principles of product quality assurance in design and production. Professional ethics. Safety and design for the environment. Culmination of team design projects initiated in NANO 120A with a working prototype designed for a real engineering application. Prerequisites: NANO 120A.

NANO 134. Polymeric Materials (4) 
Foundations of polymeric materials. Topics: structure of polymers; mechanisms of polymer synthesis; characterization methods using calorimetric, mechanical, rheological, and X-ray-based techniques; and electronic, mechanical, and thermodynamic properties. Special classes of polymers: engineering plastics, semiconducting polymers, photoresists, and polymers for medicine. Cross-listed with CENG 134 and CHEM 134. Students may only receive credit for one of the following: CENG 134, CHEM 134, NANO 134. Prerequisites: CHEM 6C and PHYS 2C.

NANO 141A. Engineering Mechanics I: Analysis of Equilibrium (4)
Newton’s laws. Concepts of force and moment vector. Free body diagrams. Internal and external forces. Equilibrium of concurrent, coplanar, and three-dimensional system of forces. Equilibrium analysis of structural systems, including beams, trusses, and frames. Equilibrium problems with friction. Prerequisites: MATH 20C and PHYS 2A.

NANO 141B. Engineering Mechanics II: Analysis of Motion (4)
Newton’s laws of motion. Kinematic and kinetic ​description of particle motion. Angular momentum. Energy and work principles. Motion of the system of interconnected particles. Mass center. Degrees of freedom. Equations of planar motion of rigid bodies. Energy methods. Lagrange’s equations of motion. Introduction to vibration. Free and forced vibrations of a single degree of freedom system. Undamped and damped vibrations. Application to NanoEngineering problems. Prerequisites: MATH 20D and NANO 141A.

NANO 146. Nanoscale Optical Microscopy and Spectroscopy (4)
Fundamentals in optical imaging and spectroscopy at the nanometer scale. Diffraction-limited techniques, near-field methods, multi-photon imaging and spectroscopy, Raman techniques, Plasmon-enhanced methods, scan-probe techniques, novel sub-diffraction-limit imaging techniques, and energy transfer methods. Prerequisites: NANO 104.

NANO 148. Thermodynamics of Materials (4)
Fundamental laws of thermodynamics for simple substances; application to flow processes and to nonreacting mixtures; statistical thermodynamics of ideal gases and crystalline solids; chemical and materials thermodynamics; multiphase and multicomponent equilibria in reacting systems; electrochemistry. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

NANO 150. Mechanics of Nanomaterials (4)
Introduction to mechanics of rigid and deformable bodies. Continuum and atomistic models, interatomic forces and intermolecular interactions. Nanomechanics, material defects, elasticity, plasticity, creep, and fracture. Composite materials, nanomaterials, biological materials. Prerequisites: NANO 108.

NANO 156. Modern Concepts in Nanotechnology (4)
This course offers a worm’s eye perspective on recent developments on nanomaterials through case studies building on basic principles of synthesis techniques, processing, microstructural control, and unique physical properties of materials in nanoscale dimensions. Particular focus will be given to physical properties and technological applications of nanowires, quantum dots, and thin films. Cross-listed with MAE 166. Students may not receive credit for both NANO 156 and MAE 166. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

NANO 158. Phase Transformations and Kinetics (4)
Materials and microstructures changes. Understanding of diffusion to enable changes in the chemical distribution and microstructure of materials, rates of diffusion. Phase transformations, effects of temperature and driving force on transformations and microstructure. Prerequisites: NANO 108 and NANO 148.

NANO 158L. Materials Processing Laboratory (4) 
Metal casting processes, solidification, deformation processing, thermal processing: solutionizing, aging, and tempering, joining processes such as welding and brazing. The effect of processing route on microstructure and its effect on mechanical and physical properties will be explored. NanoEngineering majors have priority enrollment. Prerequisites: NANO 158.

NANO 159. Electrochemistry: Fundamentals and Applications (4)
Introduce fundamentals of electrochemical processes and electrode reactions to the principles of electrochemical techniques, instrumental requirements, and their diverse real-life applications in the energy, environmental, and diagnostics areas. Prerequisites: CHEM 6A or 6AH, CHEM 6B or 6BH, CHEM 6C or 6CH, CHEM 7L or 7LM.

NANO 161. Material Selection in Engineering (4)
Selection of materials for engineering systems, based on constitutive analyses of functional requirements and material properties. The role and implications of processing on material selection. Optimizing material selection in a quantitative methodology. Priority enrollment given to NanoEngineering majors. Prerequisites: NANO 108. Department approval required. Restricted to major code NA25 or by department approval.

NANO 164. Advanced Micro- and Nano-materials for Energy Storage and Conversion (4)
Materials for energy storage and conversion in existing and future power systems, including fuel cells and batteries, photovoltaic cells, thermoelectric cells, and hybrids. Prerequisites: NANO 101, NANO 102, and upper-division standing.

NANO 168. Electrical, Dielectric, and Magnetic Properties of Engineering Materials (4)
Introduction to physical principles of electrical, dielectric, and magnetic properties. Semiconductors, control of defects, thin film, and nanocrystal growth, electronic and optoelectronic devices. Processing-microstructure-property relations of dielectric materials, including piezoelectric, pyroelectric and ferroelectric, and magnetic materials. Prerequisites: NANO 102 and NANO 104.

NANO 174. Mechanical Behavior of Materials (4)
Microscopic and macroscopic aspects of the mechanical behavior of engineering materials, with emphasis on recent development in materials characterization by mechanical methods. The fundamental aspects of plasticity in engineering materials, strengthening mechanisms, and mechanical failure modes of materials systems. Prerequisites: NANO 108.

NANO 174L. Mechanical Behavior Laboratory (4)
Experimental investigation of mechanical behavior of engineering materials. Laboratory exercises emphasize the fundamental relationship between microstructure and mechanical properties, and the evolution of the microstructure as a consequence of rate process. Prerequisites: NANO 174.

NANO 175. NanoEngineering in Medicine (4)
Introduction to nanomedicine. Topics include nanoscale material, biological systems vs. synthetic vs. bio-inspired systems, drug and gene delivery, molecular imaging, vaccines, immunoengineering, pharmacology, clinical application in cancer, cardiovascular disease, infectious disease, immune diseases, genetic disorders, skin diseases, and regenerative medicine. Students will not receive credit for both NANO 175 and CENG 175. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

NANO 181. Data Science in Materials Science (4)
Comprehensive introduction into the application of data science to materials science. Introduction to broad array of machine learning techniques (e.g., supervised, unsupervised, etc.) and applications (e.g., regression, dimensionality reduction, classification), with a focus on practical examples in materials science. Prerequisites: NANO 114 or CENG 114.

NANO 199. Independent Study for Undergraduates in Nanoengineering (4–4)
Research project as equivalent to a “senior thesis” can be approved for two NanoEngineering elective courses (eight units total). This course is taken as an elective on a P/NP basis. It must be done in consecutive quarters and the student must find a faculty member who will oversee the research project. Eligible students must have completed at least ninety units and must have a UC San Diego cumulative GPA of 3.0 or better. Detailed policy and procedures may be obtained from the Student Affairs Office. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

SE 1. Introduction to Structures and Design (4)
Introduction to fundamentals of structures and how structures work. Overview of structural behavior and structural design process through hands-on projects. Lessons learned from structural failures. Professional ethics. Role and responsibility of structural engineers. Introduction to four structural engineering focus sequences. Program or materials fees may apply. Enrollment restricted to SE27 majors only.

SE 3. Graphical Communication for Engineering Design (4)
Use of computer graphics (CAD software) to communicate engineering designs. Includes visualization, sketching, 2D and 3D graphics standards, dimensioning, tolerance, assemblies, and prototyping/testing with light manufacturing methods. Project/system management software, i.e., building information modeling (BIM), will be introduced. Use of computer resources. Prerequisites: SE 1

SE 7. Spatial Visualization (1)
Spatial visualization is the ability to manipulate 2D and 3D shapes in one’s mind. In this course, students will perform exercises that increase their spatial visualization skills. P/NP grades only. Students may not receive credit for SE 7 and MAE 7. Prerequisites: none.

SE 9. Algorithms and Programming for Structural Engineering (4)
Introduction to the MATLAB environment. Variables and types, statements, functions, blocks, loops, and branches. Algorithm development. Functions, function handles, input and output arguments. Data encapsulation and object-oriented programming. Toolboxes and libraries. Models from physics (mechanics and thermodynamics) are used in exercises and projects. Prerequisites: MATH 20A-B.

SE 87. First-year Student Seminar in Structural Engineering (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Prerequisites: open to first-year students only.

SE 99H. Independent Study in Structural Engineering (1)
Independent study or research under direction of a faculty member. Prerequisites: student must be of first year standing and a Regents Scholar. Consent of instructor or department stamp.

SE 101A. Mechanics I: Statics (4)
Principles of statics using vectors. Two- and three-dimensional equilibrium of statically determinate structures under discrete and distributed loading including hydrostatics; internal forces and concept of stress; free body diagrams; moment, product of inertia; analysis of trusses and beams. Prerequisites: MATH 20C or MATH 31BH and PHYS 2A or PHYS 2AR.

SE 101B. Mechanics II: Dynamics (4)
Kinematics and kinetics of particles in two- and three-dimensional motion. Newton’s equations of motion. Energy and momentum methods. Impulsive motion and impact. Systems of particles. Kinetics and kinematics of rigid bodies in 2-D. Introduction to 3-D dynamics of rigid bodies. Prerequisites: SE 101A.

SE 101C. Mechanics III: Vibrations (4)
Free and forced vibrations of damped 1-DOF systems; vibrations isolation, impact and packaging problems. Analysis of discrete MDOF systems using matrix representation; normal mode of frequencies and modal matrix formulation. Lagrange’s equations. Modal superposition for analysis of continuous vibrating systems. Prerequisites: MATH 18 or MATH 31AH and SE 101B or MAE 130B.

SE 102. Introduction to Computing for Engineers (4)
Introduction to engineering computing. Interpolation, integration, differentiation. Ordinary differential equations. Nonlinear algebraic equations. Systems of linear algebraic equations. Representation of data in the computer. Prerequisites: SE 9 (or MAE 8) and SE 101A (or MAE 130A).

SE 103. Conceptual Structural Design (4)
Introduction to structural design approaches for civil structures. Structural materials. Loads and load paths. Gravity and lateral load elements and systems. Code design fundamentals. Construction methods. Structural idealization. Hand and computer methods of analysis. Experimental methods applied through team-based projects. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: SE 3, MAE 8 or SE 9, SE 101A, and SE 105.

SE 105. Structural Materials (5)
Lectures and labs on structural properties of engineering materials. Stress and strain. Stain measurement. Stiffness, strength, toughness, fatigue resistance, and creep. Cement and concrete, wood, aluminum alloys, steel, engineering plastics, and composite materials. Corequisite: SE 110A or MAE 131A. Prerequisites: SE 1 and SE 101A.

SE 110A. Solid Mechanics I (4)
Concepts of stress and strain. Hooke’s law. Stress transformation. Axial loading of bars. Torsion of circular shafts. Torsion of thin-walled members. Pure bending of beams. Unsymmetric bending of beams. Shear stresses in beams. Shear stresses in thin-walled beams. Shear center. Differential equation of the deflection curve. Deflections and slopes of beams from integration methods. Statically determinate and indeterminate problems. Prerequisites: MATH 20D and SE 101A.

SE 110B. Solid Mechanics II (4)
Advanced concepts in the mechanics of deformable bodies. Unsymmetrical bending of symmetrical and unsymmetrical sections. Bending of curved beams. Shear center and torsional analysis of open and closed sections. Stability analysis of columns, lateral buckling. Application of the theory of elasticity in rectangular coordinates. Prerequisites: grade of C– or better in SE 110A (or MAE 131A). Enrollment restricted to SE27 majors only.

SE 115. Fluid Mechanics for Structural Engineering (4)
Fluid statics, hydrostatic forces; integral and differential forms of conservation equations for mass, momentum, and energy; Bernoulli equation; dimensional analysis; viscous pipe flow; external flow, boundary layers; open channel flow. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A or PHYS 2AR and MATH 20D, or consent of instructor.

SE 120. Engineering Graphics and Computer Aided Structural Design (4)
Engineering graphics, solid modeling, CAD applications including 2-D and 3-D transformations, 3-D viewing, wire frame and solid models, Hidden surface elimination. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: SE 102 and SE 103.

SE 125. Statistics, Probability and Reliability (4)
Probability theory. Statistics, data analysis and inferential statistics, distributions, confidence intervals. Introduction to structural reliability and random phenomena. Applications to components and systems. Students will not receive credit for both SE 125 and MAE 108. Prerequisites: MATH 18 (or MATH 31AH) and MATH 20D. Enrollment restricted to SE27 majors only.

SE 130A. Structural Analysis I (4)
Classical methods of analysis for statically indeterminate structures. Development of computer codes for the analysis of civil, mechanical, and aerospace structures from the matrix formulation of the classical structural theory, through the direct stiffness formulation, to production-type structural analysis programs. Prerequisites: grade of C– or better in SE 110A (or MAE 131A).

SE 130B. Structural Analysis II (4)
Classical methods of analysis for statically indeterminate structures. Analysis of civil, mechanical, and aerospace structures from the matrix formulation of the classical structural theory, through the direct stiffness formulation, to production-type structural analysis programs. Prerequisites: MATH 18 (or MATH 31AH) and SE 130A.

SE 131A. Finite Element Analysis (4)
Development of finite element models based upon the Galerkin method. Application to static and dynamic heat conduction and stress analysis. Formulation of initial boundary value problem models, development of finite element formulas, solution methods, and error analysis and interpretation of results. Renumbered from SE 131. Students may not receive credit for SE 131A and SE 131. Corequisite: SE 130B. Prerequisites: MATH 20E, SE 3, and SE 110B (or MAE 131B).

SE 131B. Finite Element Analysis: Beam and Shell Models (4)
Project-based exploration of structural engineering computations. Topics include analysis of shell structures, design optimization, computational vibration analysis. Prerequisites: SE 131A (or SE 131), SE 101C (or MAE 130C), and SE 130B.

SE 132. Machine Learning for Structural Engineering (4)
This course aims at introducing concepts of machine learning and its applications to structural engineering. Theory behind popular machine learning algorithms will be discussed, including supervised learning, unsupervised learning, and deep learning. Topics include regression, classification, support vector machines, clustering, tree-based methods, model selections and regularizations, cross-validation and bootstrapping, neural networks, and Python programming. Prerequisites: SE 9 (or MAE 8), SE 110A (or MAE 131A), and SE 125 (or MAE 108).

SE 140A. Design of Civil Structures I (4)
Part I of multidisciplinary team experience to design, analyze, build, and test civil/geotechnical engineering components and systems considering codes, regulations, alternative design solutions, economics, sustainability, constructability, reliability, and aesthetics. Professionalism, technical communication, project management, teamwork, and ethics in engineering practice. Use of computer resources. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: SE 130B and SE 150A (or SE 150).

SE 140B. Design of Civil Structures II (4)
Part II of multidisciplinary team experience to design, analyze, build, and test civil/geotechnical engineering components and systems considering codes, regulations, alternative design solutions, economics, sustainability, constructability, reliability, and aesthetics. Professionalism, technical communication, project management, teamwork, and ethics in engineering practice. Use of computer resources. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: SE 140A, SE 151A, and SE 181.

SE 142. Design of Composite Structures (4)
Introduction to advanced composite materials and their applications. Fiber and matrix properties, micromechanics, stiffness, ply-by-ply stress, hygrothermal behavior, and failure prediction. Lab activity will involve design, analysis, fabrication, and testing of composite structure. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: SE 110A (or MAE 131A) and SE 110B.

SE 143A. Aerospace Structural Design I (4)
Conceptual and preliminary structural design of aircraft and space vehicles. Minimum-weight design of primary structures based upon mission requirements and configuration constraints. Multicriteria decision making. Team projects include layout, material selection, component sizing, fabrication, and cost. Oral presentations. Written reports. Use of computer resources. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: SE 3, SE 142, and SE 160B.

SE 143B. Aerospace Structural Design II (4)
Detailed structural design of aircraft and space vehicles. Composite material design considerations. Multidisciplinary design optimization. Introduction to aerospace computer-aided design and analysis tools. Team projects include the analysis, fabrication, and testing of a flight vehicle component. Oral presentations. Written reports. Use of computer resources. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: SE 143A.

SE 150A. Design of Steel Structures I (4)
Load and resistance factor design concept and loadings for structural systems. Structural steel properties and selection. Design of tension members, compression members, beams, beam-columns, simple bolted, and welded connections. Prerequisites: SE 130A and SE 110B.

SE 150B. Design of Steel Structures II (4)
Theory and behavior of steel structures leading to the development of design requirements in current specifications. Topics will include design of simple and rigid connections, composite construction, advanced topics in compression and flexural members including torsion, design of plate girders, the direct analysis method, and plastic analysis. Emphasis will be placed on fundamental concepts. Prerequisites: SE 150 or SE 150A.

SE 151A. Design of Reinforced Concrete (4)
Concrete and reinforcement properties. Service and ultimate limit state analysis and design. Design and detailing of structural components. Corequisite: SE 103. Prerequisites: SE 130A.

SE 151B. Design of Prestressed Concrete (4)
Time-dependent and independent properties of concrete and reinforcing material. Concept and application of prestressed concrete. Service and ultimate limit state analysis and design of prestressed concrete structures and components. Detailing of components. Calculation of deflection and prestress losses. Prerequisites: SE 151A.

SE 152. Seismic Design of Structures (4)
Seismic design philosophy. Ductility concepts. Lateral force resisting systems. Mechanisms of nonlinear deformation. Methods of analysis. Detailing of structural steel and reinforced concrete elements. Lessons learned from past earthquakes. Multistory building design project. Prerequisites: SE 130B, SE 150, and SE 151A.

SE 154. Design of Timber Structures (4)
Properties of wood and lumber grades. Beam design. Design of axially loaded members. Design of beam-column. Properties of plywood and structural-use panels. Design of horizontal diaphragms. Design of shear walls. Design of nailed and bolted connections. Prerequisites: SE 103 and SE 130A. Enrollment restricted to SE27 majors only.

SE 160A. Aerospace Structural Mechanics I (4)
Aircraft and spacecraft flight loads and operational envelopes, three-dimensional stress/strain relations, metallic and composite materials, failure theories, three-dimensional space trusses and stiffened shear panels, combined extension-bend-twist behavior of thin-walled multicell aircraft and space vehicle structures, modulus-weighted section properties, shear center. Prerequisites: SE 105 (or MAE 21) and SE 101B (or MAE 30B) and SE 110A (or MAE 131A).

SE 160B. Aerospace Structural Mechanics II (4)
Analysis of aerospace structures via work-energy principles and finite element analysis. Bending of metallic and laminated composite plates and shells. Static vibration and buckling analysis of simple and built-up aircraft structures. Introduction to wing divergence and flutter, fastener analysis. Prerequisites: SE 160A. Enrollment restricted to MC25, MC27, and SE27 majors only.

SE 163. Nondestructive Evaluation (4)
Fourier signal processing, liquid penetrant, elastic wave propagation, ultrasonic testing, impact-echo, acoustic emission testing, vibrational testing, infrared thermography. May be coscheduled with SE 263. Prerequisites: SE 110A or consent of instructor.

SE 164. Sensors and Data Acquisition for Structural Engineering (4)
This course discusses theory, design, and applications of sensor technologies in the context of structural engineering and structural health monitoring. Topics include sensors and sensing mechanisms; measurement uncertainty; signal conditioning and interface circuits; data acquisition; analog/digital circuits; and emerging sensors. May be coscheduled with SE 264. Prerequisites: SE 101C and SE 110A.

SE 165. Structural Health Monitoring (4)
A modern paradigm of structural health monitoring as it applies to structural and mechanical systems is presented. Concepts in data acquisition, feature extraction, data normalization, and statistical modeling will be introduced in an integrated context. MATLAB-based exercise. Term project. Use of computer resources. Prerequisites: SE 101C (or MAE 130C).

SE 167. Signal Processing and Spectral Analysis for Structural Engineering (4)
Signal processing is widely used in engineering and physical sciences. This course discusses techniques to analyze signals (or data), particularly related to structural dynamic response focusing on time/frequency domain data analysis (Fourier transform, digital filtering, and feature extraction). Prerequisites: SE 101C. Enrollment restricted to SE27 majors only.

SE 168. Structural System Testing and Model Correlation (4)
Dynamic/model testing of structures: test planning/execution, actuation, sensing, and data acquisition, signal processing, data conditioning, test troubleshooting. Methods of updating finite element structural models to correlate with dynamic test results. Model/test correlation assessment in industrial practice. Knowledge of MATLAB strongly encouraged. Prerequisites: SE 101C (or MAE 130C) and SE 131A (or SE 131).

SE 171. Aerospace Structures Repair (4)
Review methods used to repair aerospace structures. Emphasis on primary load-bearing airframe structures and analysis/design of substantiate repairs. Identification of structural/corrosion distress, fatigue cracking, damage tolerance, integrity and durability of built-up members, patching, health monitoring. Use of computer resources. Prerequisites: SE 110A (or MAE 131A) and SE 110B (or MAE 131B).

SE 180. Earthquake Engineering (4)
Elements of seismicity and seismology. Seismic hazards. Dynamic analysis of structures underground motion. Elastic and inelastic response spectra. Modal analysis, nonlinear time-history analysis. Earthquake resistant design. Seismic detailing. Prerequisites: grade of C– or better in SE 110A, and SE 130A. Enrollment restricted to SE27 majors only.

SE 181. Geotechnical Engineering (4)
General introduction to physical and engineering properties of soils. Soil classification and identification methods. Compaction and construction control. Total and effective stress. Permeability, seepage, and consolidation phenomena. Shear strength of sand and clay. Prerequisites: grade of C– or better in SE 110A or MAE 131A. Enrollment restricted to SE27 majors only.

SE 182. Foundation Engineering (4)
Application of soil mechanics to the analysis, design, and construction of foundations for structures. Soil exploration, sampling, and in situ testing techniques. Stress distribution and settlement of structures. Bearing capacities of shallow foundations and effects on structural design. Analysis of axial and lateral capacity of deep foundations, including drilled piers and driven piles. Prerequisites: SE 181. Enrollment restricted to SE27 majors only.

SE 184. Ground Improvement (4)
Concepts underpinning mechanical, hydraulic, chemical and inclusion-based methods of ground improvement will be discussed. Students will be able to understand the advantages, disadvantages and limitations of the various methods; and develop a conceptual design for the most appropriate improvement strategy. Prerequisites: SE 181.

SE 192. Senior Seminar (1)
The Senior Seminar is designed to allow senior undergraduates to meet with faculty members to explore an intellectual topic in structural engineering. Topics will vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to twenty students with preference given to seniors. Prerequisites: SE major. Department stamp and/or consent of instructor.

SE 195. Teaching (2–4)
Teaching and tutorial assistance in a SE course under supervision of instructor. Not more than four units may be used to satisfy graduation requirements. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: B average in major, upper-division standing, and consent of department chair. Department stamp required.

SE 197. Structural Engineering Internship (1–4)
An enrichment program, available to a limited number of undergraduate students, which provides work experience with industry, government offices, etc., under the supervision of a faculty member and industrial supervisor. Coordination of the Engineering Internship is conducted through UC San Diego’s Academic Internship Program. Prerequisites: completion of ninety units with a 2.5 GPA and consent of department chair. Department stamp required.

SE 198. Directed Study Group in Structural Engineering (4)
Directed group study, on a topic or in a field not included in the regular department curriculum, by special arrangement with a faculty member. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of instructor or department stamp.

SE 199. Independent Study in Structural Engineering (1–4)
Independent reading or research on a problem by special arrangement with a faculty member. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of instructor or department stamp.

ENVR 30. Introduction to Environmental Studies (4)
Examines global and regional environmental issues. Fundamental scientific and civic literacy is introduced within community, policy, and economic contexts. The scope of problems include air and water pollution, climate disruption, solid waste disposal, hazardous waste treatment, and environmental impact assessment. Prerequisites: none.

ENVR 87. Environmental Studies First-year Seminar (1)
The First-year Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students.

ENVR 102. Selected Topics in Environmental Studies (4)
An interdisciplinary course focusing on one of a variety of topics related to environmental studies such as environmental policy and politics, foreign study in environmental problems, environmental history, nature writers, ethics and the environment. May be repeated three times for credit as topics vary. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

ENVR 105. Conservation Solutions (4)
A project-based course in which students will develop and implement a curriculum module for high school students at the Dawson Los Monos Canyon Reserve. Includes an introduction to the natural history and resource management challenges of this ecological preserve. Students will conduct research projects which will be used to create a curriculum module for a high school environmental science course and guide high school students through field research and a discussion of conservation solutions. Course may include a required field trip, and students are responsible for their own transportation. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

ENVR 110. Environmental Law (4)
Explores environmental policy in the United States and the ways in which it is reflected in law. The social and political issues addressed include environmental justice and environmental racism, as well as the role of government in implementing environmental law. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

ENVR 120. Coastal Ecology (4)
Explores the diverse ecosystems of coastal San Diego County (salt marsh, rocky intertidal, sandy beach, etc.) in the classroom and in the field with attention to basic principles of field ecology, natural history, and techniques for collecting ecological data. Course and/or materials fee may apply. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

ENVR 140. Wilderness and Human Values (4)
“Wilderness” plays a central role in the consciousness of American environmentalists and serves as focal point for public policies, recreation, and political activism. This course explores its evolving historical, philosophical, ecological, and aesthetic meanings and includes guest speakers and a field component. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

ENVR 141. Wilderness and Human Values Workshop (2)
A course to prepare students to serve as discussion leaders for ENVR 140, Wilderness and Human Values. Includes reading, discussion, library and online research, and field trips. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and department approval.

ENVR 142GS. Wilderness and Human Values Abroad (4)
Explores historical and cultural perspectives on the human relationship with the natural world, from prehistory to the present. The course investigates how humans have interacted with the natural world and how this interaction has been influenced by such factors as class, race, and gender. The course considers the cultural, political, and economic ramifications of this interaction and even explores ideas about the future of wilderness. Will include unique content to host country. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: upper-division standing required. Must apply and be accepted to the Global Seminar Program.

ENVR 144. Wilderness Training (2)
Provides technical skills to deliver wilderness programs and leadership skills to manage student groups on wilderness programs. The course combines reading and experiential components with assessment through competency demonstration and a reflective essay due at the end of the course. Course topics include leadership and group management, decision making and risk management, the art of teaching and facilitating, conflict resolution, and working in and understanding wilderness environments. Students must participate in two quarters of non-credit-bearing work with Outback Adventures (as part of their Outdoor Leadership program) in order to enroll in ENVR 144. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and department approval required.

ENVR 150. Environmental Justice (4)
This course explores the relationship between humans and the environment, focusing on the intrinsic connections between the environment and social, racial, and economic hierarchies that reveal structural inequities. Topics include environmental problems, community responses, policy debates, the burdens of environmental contamination and health disparities (and their effects on communities of color), and the intertwined processes of environmental justice. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. Students will not receive credit for both ENVR 150 and ENVR 150GS.

ENVR 150GS. Environmental Justice (4)
This course explores the relationship between humans and the environment, focusing on the intrinsic connections between the environment and social, racial, and economic hierarchies that reveal structural inequities. Topics include environmental problems, community responses, policy debates, the burdens of environmental contamination and health disparities (and their effects on communities of color), and the intertwined processes of environmental justice. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; program or materials fees may apply. Must apply to Global Seminar Program and be accepted. Students will not receive credit for both ENVR 150 and ENVR 150GS.

ENVR 195. Apprentice Teaching in Environmental Studies (0-4)
Instructor will define assistant’s responsibilities in preparing class presentations, leading students’ discussions, and evaluating students’ work. May be taken two times for credit.Prerequisites: department approval required.

ENVR 198. Directed Group Study in Environmental Studies (4)
Directed group research and study, normally with a focus on areas not otherwise covered in the curriculum. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. Department stamp required. May be taken three times for credit as topics vary.

ENVR 199. Independent Study in Environmental Studies (4)
Independent study in a topic not generally covered in the regular curriculum. Prerequisites: consent of instructor, director of Environmental Studies. May be taken two times for credit as content varies. Department stamp required.

ESYS 10. Introduction to Environmental Systems (4)
This course explores the interdisciplinary character of environmental issues through an examination of a particular topic (climate change, for example) from numerous disciplinary perspectives (e.g., biology, chemistry, physics, political science, and economics). Prerequisites: none.

ESYS 87. First-year Seminar (1)
The First-year Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year seminars can be offered in all campus departments and undergraduate college, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students with preference given to entering first-year students. (P/NP grades only)

ESYS 90. Perspectives on Environmental Issues (1)
Provides an introduction to environmental systems. Faculty members from departments in the natural sciences, geosciences, and social sciences will offer perspectives in these areas.

ESYS 101. Environmental Biology (4)
This course surveys biochemical and physiological processes governing the relationship between organisms and their environments, such as those involved in element cycling and cellular homeostasis. The course introduces biological perspectives on human activities ranging from antibiotic use to genetic engineering. Prerequisites: BILD 1 or 2 or 3 or equivalent, or consent of instructor.

ESYS 102. The Solid and Fluid Earth (4)
Earth’s dynamic physical systems interact in complex ways with profound impact on our environment. Processes such as volcanism and weathering enable geochemical exchange between solid and fluid (ocean and atmosphere) systems. Sea level and climate changes interface with tectonic processes. Prerequisites: MATH 10A or MATH 20A, CHEM 6A, PHYS 1A or 2A, or consent of instructor.

ESYS 103. Environmental Challenges: Science and Solutions (4)
This course explores the impacts of human, social, economic, and industrial activity on the environment. It highlights the central roles in ensuring sustainable development played by market forces, technological innovation, and government regulation on local, national, and global scales. Prerequisites: MATH 11 or MATH 20B or consent of instructor.

ESYS 187A. Senior Internship Project I (4)
The first quarter of the three-quarter senior project sequence. In this course, the student works in a self-selected internship (off-campus, research project or on-campus project), focused on an interdisciplinary environmental problem or research topic. Prerequisites: ESYS 103.

ESYS 187B. Senior Internship Project II (4)
This is the second quarter of the three-quarter senior project sequence. In this course, the student continues work on their self-selected internship (off-campus, research project or on-campus project), focused around an interdisciplinary environmental problem or research topic. A final evaluation of their internship signed by the student, an internship supervisor, and a faculty mentor is required at the end of the course. Prerequisites: ESYS 187A.

ESYS 187C. Environmental Systems Senior Seminar (4)
This is the third quarter of the three-quarter senior project sequence. This seminar provides a venue for students to develop a written report and a poster on their internship results. Students present their posters in the ESYS symposium at the end of the quarter. Prerequisites: ESYS 187B.

ESYS 199. Independent Study (2-4)
Individually guided readings or projects in the area of environmental systems.

ETHN 1. Introduction to Ethnic Studies: Land and Labor (4)
This course examines key historical events and debates in the field that center around land and labor, including disputes about territory and natural resources, slavery and other forms of unfree labor, labor migration and recruitment, and US and transnational borders. Students may not receive credit for both ETHN 1R and ETHN 1.

ETHN 1R. Introduction to Ethnic Studies: Land and Labor (4)
This online course examines key historical events and debates in the field that center around land and labor, including disputes about territory and natural resources, slavery and other forms of unfree labor, labor migration and recruitment, and US and transnational borders. Students may not receive credit for both ETHN 1R and ETHN 1.

ETHN 2. Introduction to Ethnic Studies: Circulations of Difference (4)
Focusing on historical and contemporary migration and the circulation of commodities, knowledge, bodies, and culture, this course looks at how racial formation is shaped and contested by such movements within national and transnational contexts. Students may not receive credit for both ETHN 2R and ETHN 2.

ETHN 2R. Introduction to Ethnic Studies: Circulations of Difference (4)
Focusing on historical and contemporary migration and the circulation of commodities, knowledge, bodies, and culture, this online course examines how racial formation is shaped and contested by such movements within national and transnational contexts. Students may not receive credit for both ETHN 2R and ETHN 2.

ETHN 3. Introduction to Ethnic Studies: Making Culture (4)
Through examining the historical and contemporary politics of representation in both popular and community-focused media, film, art, music, and literature, this course tracks racial formation through studying the sphere of cultural production, consumption, and contestation. Students may not receive credit for both ETHN 1C and ETHN 3.

ETHN 3R. Remote—Introduction to Ethnic Studies: Making Culture (4)
Through examining the historical and contemporary politics of representation in both popular and community-focused media, film, art, music, and literature, this course tracks racial formation through studying the sphere of cultural production, consumption, and contestation via this online learning course. Students will not receive credit for both ETHN 3R and ETHN 3.

ETHN 20. Introduction to Asian American Studies (4)
This course introduces students to key issues in Asian American lives, with emphasis on the global historical context of migration; changing ethnic and racial consciousness; economic, social, and political status; cultural production; and family and gender relations.

ETHN 30. Introduction to Chicanx and Latinx Studies (4)
Introduction to Chicanx/Latinx/Hispanic history, culture, and activism with focus on race and class differences within US Latinx cultures and in relation to other groups; gender, sexuality, and colonialism; and new ways of worldmaking within and across these categories.

ETHN 87. First-year Student Seminar (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students.

ETHN 97. Field Studies in Racial and Ethnic Communities (1–4)
Supervised community fieldwork on topics of importance to racial and ethnic communities in the San Diego County region. Regular individual meetings with faculty sponsor and final project and/or written report are required. Prerequisites: lower-division standing, completion of at least thirty units of undergraduate study at UC San Diego, minimum 3.0 GPA at UC San Diego, consent of instructor, and completed and approved Special Studies form.

ETHN 98. Directed Group Studies in Ethnic Studies (1–4)
Directed group study on a topic or in a field not included in the regular department curriculum by special arrangement with a faculty member. Prerequisites: lower-division standing, completion of at least thirty units of undergraduate study at UC San Diego, minimum 3.0 GPA at UC San Diego, consent of instructor, and completed and approved Special Studies form.

ETHN 99. Independent Study in Ethnic Studies (1–4)
Directed study on a topic or in a field not included in the regular department curriculum by special arrangement with a faculty member. Prerequisites: lower-division standing, completion of at least thirty units of undergraduate study at UC San Diego, minimum 3.0 GPA at UC San Diego, consent of instructor, and completed and approved Special Studies form.

ETHN 100A. Ethnic Studies: Theoretical Approaches (4)
An advanced survey of key issues, themes, and debates in the field of critical ethnic studies focusing on the connection between race and social structures. Students will use diverse theoretical frameworks to identify and interpret contemporary and historical social problems. Prerequisites: ETHN 1 or ETHN 2 or ETHN 3, ethnic studies majors or minors, or consent of instructor.

ETHN 100B. Interdisciplinary Methodologies (4)
An introduction to interdisciplinary research methodologies in critical ethnic studies. By developing a critical analysis of the politics of knowledge production, students will learn to identify different methodological approaches in the field and to evaluate their use in practical application. Prerequisites: ETHN 100A, ethnic studies major or minor, or consent of instructor.

ETHN 100C. Social Justice Praxis (4)
An intensive capstone experience for ethnic studies majors, this course combines an advanced exploration of praxis-based approaches to social justice with practicum-based independent campus, community, creative, or research projects. Prerequisites: ETHN 100A and ETHN 100B, ethnic studies major or minor, or consent of instructor.

ETHN 100H. Honors Research Design (4)
This discussion-based course will focus on the application of advanced research methods to the design of extensive, independent research-based projects. Prerequisites: ETHN 100A and ETHN 100B. Department approval required.

ETHN 100M. Critical Health and Medical Writing (4)
This intensive capstone course focuses on reflective and analytical writing about the students’ cumulative experiences with race, gender, and sexuality with respect to medical and health sciences. It prepares the students’ professional portfolio and potential applications to graduate or medical schools. Students develop their professional voices as informed advocates for racial/gendered/classed justice in medicine and health via practicum-based projects. Prerequisites: ETHN 100A and ETHN 100B.

ETHN 101. Ethnic Images in Film (4)
An upper-division lecture course studying representations of ethnicity in the American cinema. Topics include ethnic images as narrative devices, the social implications of ethnic images, and the role of film in shaping and reflecting societal power relations.

ETHN 101TV. Ethnic Images in TV (4)
Adopting an ethnic studies lens on the medium, this class focuses on socially significant TV shows that reflect critically on race, gender, class, ability, sexuality, and nation. Students will study the significance of race and related forms of difference in contemporary TV, with a particular emphasis on streaming, audience algorithms, and binge watching.

ETHN 102. Science and Technology in Society: Race/Gender/Class (4)
This course examines the role of science and technology in forming popular conceptions of race, gender and class, and vice versa. We also consider how some populations benefit from the results of experimentation while others come to be its subjects.

ETHN 103. Environmental Racism (4)
This course will examine the concept of environmental racism, the empirical evidence of its widespread existence, and the efforts by government, residents, workers, and activists to combat it. We will examine those forces that create environmental injustices in order to understand its causes as well as its consequences. Students are expected to learn and apply several concepts and social scientific theories to the course material.

ETHN 103A/HIUS 103. The United States and the Pacific World (4)
History of the United States in the Pacific, with an emphasis on Hawai’i, Guam, the Mariana Islands, and the Marshall Islands, from the nineteenth century to the present. Topics include colonialism and imperialism, cultural representations, indigenous knowledge and sovereignty, militarism, tourism, and environmentalism. Students will not receive credit for both HIUS 103 and ETHN 103A.

ETHN 104. Race, Space, and Segregation (4)
Through in-depth studies of housing segregation, urban renewal and displacement, neighborhood race effects, and the location of hazards and amenities, this course examines how space becomes racialized and how race becomes spatialized in the contemporary United States.

ETHN 105. Ethnic Diversity and the City (4)
(Cross-listed with USP 104.) This course will examine the city as a crucible of ethnic identity, exploring both the racial and ethnic dimensions of urban life in the United States from the Civil War to the present.

ETHN 106. Life, Death, and the Human (4)
Using interdisciplinary approaches, this course examines some of the contexts in which the conditions of life and death become sites of political, economic, and cultural significance, and how categories of difference impact access to the protections of “humanity.”

ETHN 107. Fieldwork in Racial and Ethnic Communities (4)
(Cross-listed with USP 130.) This is a research course examining social, economic, and political issues in ethnic and racial communities through a variety of research methods that may include interviews and archival, library, and historical research.

ETHN 108. Race, Culture, and Social Change (4)
(Cross-listed with MUS 151.) Aggrieved groups often generate distinctive forms of cultural expression by turning negative ascription into positive affirmation and by transforming segregation into congregation. This course examines the role of cultural expressions in struggles for social change by these communities inside and outside the United States.

ETHN 109. Race and Social Movements (4)
This course explores collective mobilizations for resources, recognition, and power by members of aggrieved racialized groups, past and present. Emphasis will be placed on the conditions that generate collective movements, the strategies and ideologies that these movements have developed, and on the prospect for collective mobilization for change within aggrieved communities in the present and future.

ETHN 109A. Race, Empire, and Japanese America (4)
This course examines the impact of U.S. and Japanese empires on the Japanese American community. Using primary sources like artwork and oral histories, we examine the struggle against racial exclusion during WWII, the postwar development of the current community, and ongoing solidarity work against current processes of exclusion, incarceration, and detention.

ETHN 110. Cultural Worldviews of Indigenous America (4)
Places Native Americans/indigenous people’s ways of living, knowing, and understanding the world in relation to settler-immigrant societies in North America. Students gain analytical tools for thinking about world views through themes of cosmology, land, kinship, and identity formation.

ETHN 111. Native American Literature (4)
This course analyzes Native American written and oral traditions. Students will read chronicles and commentaries on published texts, historic speeches, trickster narratives, oratorical and prophetic tribal epics, and will delve into the methodological problems posed by tribal literature in translation.

ETHN 112A. History of Native Americans and Indigenous Peoples in the U.S. I (4)
This course examines the histories of Native American, Pacific Islander, and other indigenous populations in the United States, with specific emphasis on precolonial and postcontact interaction and knowledge systems of indigenous groups from the 1400s to mid-nineteenth century.

ETHN 112B. History of Native Americans and Indigenous Peoples in the U.S. II (4)
This course examines the history of Native American, Pacific Islander, and other indigenous populations in the United States, with specific emphasis on and analyses of postcontact interactions, federal laws and policies, and decolonial efforts among American Indians, Pacific Islanders, other tribal communities, and indigenous peoples/nations in the United States from the late nineteenth century to the present.

ETHN 112C. California Native American History (4)
An introduction to California Native (Indian) history, and how it has shaped people, both Indian and non-Indian, and their possible futures. The course follows four interconnecting themes: land and people; Spanish colonization; dispossession and subordination related to the creation of California; and issues of “survivance.”

ETHN 113. Decolonizing Education (4)
This course considers decolonial theories of education in relation to classroom pedagogy, focusing on US urban high schools.

ETHN 113A. Decolonizing Geology (4)
The origins, development, and practice of the geological sciences are closely tied to colonization, but these ties rarely are acknowledged, discussed, critiqued, or used as a basis for rethinking present-day practices and trends. We will deconstruct the historical relationship between colonialism and geology, discuss how this relationship has developed over time, and explore practical methods for how the field of geology (and, by extension, other fields of Western science) might be decolonized.

ETHN 114A. Representing Native America (4)
History and theory: Introduction to the history and theory of museum representation of American Indians in order to explore its relation to colonialism and decolonization. Study of Plains Indian drawings from 1860 to 1890 will allow the class to create new approaches to designing a museum exhibition.

ETHN 114B. Representing Native America—Exhibition Design (4)
This course follows the introduction to the history and theory of museum representation of American Indians in order to explore its relation to colonialism and decolonization (part one). It develops the proposal completed by students in part one of the course, completing a curatorial brief for an exhibition of Native American art with a partner museum incorporating new and decolonizing approaches to representation. Prerequisites: ETHN 114A.

ETHN 115. Monsters, Orphans, and Robots (4)
This course considers dark agencies, queer threats, and how they seep through cracks in containers meant to disable them. This class will be writing intensive with an artistic production component. Recommended: ETHN 100 is recommended prior to enrollment in this course.

ETHN 116. The United States–Mexico Border in Comparative Perspective (4)
This course critically explores the US-Mexico frontier and the social-cultural issues on both sides of the international demarcation. Social-historical and political-economic patterns illuminate border life, ethnic identity, social diversity, and cultural expression. Border ethnography is complemented by film and music.

ETHN 117. Organic Social Movements (4)
This course focuses on local responses to global change and social disruption through the examination of organic movements in colonial and racialized contexts around the world.

ETHN 118. Contemporary Immigration Issues (4)
This course examines the diversity of today’s immigrants—their social origins and contexts of exit and their adaptation experiences and contexts of incorporation.

ETHN 119. Race in the Americas (4)
This course explores the genesis, evolution, and contradictions of racially heterogeneous societies in the Americas, from European conquest to the present. Topics: the social history of Native Americans, blacks, and Asians, their interactions with European settlers, and racial, sexual, and class divisions.

ETHN 120. Race and Performance: The Politics of Popular Culture (4)
This course explores how racial categories and ideologies have been constructed through performance and displays of the body in the United States and other sites. Racialized performances, whether self-displays or coerced displays, such as world’s fairs, museums, minstrelsy, film, ethnography, and tourist performances are considered.

ETHN 120D. Race and Oral History in San Diego (4)
(Cross-listed with HIUS 120D.) This course examines the history of racial and ethnic communities in San Diego. Drawing from historical research and interdisciplinary scholarship, we will explore how race impacted the history and development of San Diego and how “ordinary” folk made sense of their racial identity and experiences. Toward these ends, students will conduct oral history and community-based research, develop public and digital humanities skills, and preserve a collection of oral histories for future scholarship. Concurrent enrollment in an Academic Internship Program course strongly recommended. Students may not receive credit for HIUS 120D and ETHN 120D.

ETHN 121. Contemporary Asian American History (4)
The course will study changes in Asian American communities as a result of renewed immigration since 1965; the influx of refugees from Southeast Asia; and the economic impact of contemporary social movements on Asian Americans’ current economic, social, and political status. Students may not receive credit for both ETHN 121R and ETHN 121.

ETHN 121R. Contemporary Asian American History (4)
This online course will study changes in Asian American communities as a result of renewed immigration since 1965; the influx of refugees from Southeast Asia; and the economic impact of contemporary social movements on Asian Americans’ current economic, social, and political status. Students may not receive credit for both ETHN 121R and ETHN 121.

ETHN 122. Asian American Culture and Identity (4)
A survey of Asian American cultural expressions in literature, art, and music to understand the social experiences that helped forge Asian American identity. Topics: culture conflict, media portrayals, assimilation pressures, the model minority myth, and interethnic and class relations.

ETHN 123. Asian American Politics (4)
This course will examine the development of Asian American politics by studying the historical and contemporary factors, such as political and economic exclusion, that have contributed to the importance and complexity of ethnicity as a mobilizing force in politics.

ETHN 124. Asian American Literature (4)
(Cross-listed with LTEN 181.) Selected topics in the literature by men and women of Asian descent who live and write in the United States. May be repeated for credit when topics vary.

ETHN 125. Asian American History (4)
This course explores historical issues in Asian American history, focusing on major topics such as immigration, colonization, war, community, social movements, and politics. We use sources such as scholarly writing, primary documents, cultural productions, and creative work to inform our analysis. Assignments are designed to provoke active discussion and lead to a critical understanding of the links between history and our present-day political and socioeconomic context. Students may receive credit for one of the following: ETHN 125R or ETHN 125.

ETHN 125R. Remote—Asian American History (4)
This distance learning course explores historical issues in Asian American history, focusing on major topics such as immigration, colonization, war, community, social movements, and politics. We use sources such as scholarly writing, primary documents, cultural productions, and creative work to inform our analysis. Assignments are designed to provoke active discussion and lead to a critical understanding of the links between history and our present-day political and socioeconomic context. Students may receive credit for one of the following: ETHN 125R or ETHN 125.

ETHN 126. Comparative Filipino and Vietnamese American Identities and Communities (4)
This course compares the historical and contemporary social, political, and economic experiences of Filipino and Vietnamese Americans, paying particular attention to the impact of US wars in the Philippines and in Vietnam on their respective lives.

ETHN 127. Sexuality and Nation (4)
(Cross-listed with CGS 112.) This course explores the nexus of sex, race, ethnicity, gender, and nation and considers their influence on identity, sexuality, migration, movement, and borders and other social, cultural, and political issues that these constructs affect.

ETHN 128. Hip-Hop: The Politics of Culture (4)
(Cross-listed with MUS 152.) Examination of hip-hop’s technology, lyrics, and dance and its influences in graffiti, film, music video, fiction, advertising, gender, corporate investment, government, and censorship with a critical focus on race, gender, and popular culture and the politics of creative expression.

ETHN 129. Asian and Latina Immigrant Workers in the Global Economy (4)
(Cross-listed with USP 135.) This course will explore the social, political, and economic implications of global economic restructuring, immigration policies, and welfare reform on Asian and Latina immigrant women in the United States. We will critically examine these larger social forces from the perspectives of Latina and Asian immigrant women workers, incorporating theories of race, class, and gender to provide a careful reading of the experiences of immigrant women on the global assembly line.

ETHN 130. Social and Economic History of the Southwest I (4)
(Cross-listed with HIUS 158.) This course examines the history of the Spanish and Mexican Borderlands (what became the US Southwest) from roughly 1400 to the end of the Mexican-American War in 1848, focusing specifically on the area’s social, cultural, and political development.

ETHN 131. Social and Economic History of the Southwest II (4)
(Cross-listed with HIUS 159.) This course examines the history of the American Southwest from the Mexican-American War in 1846–48 to the present, focusing on immigration, racial and ethnic conflict, and the growth of Chicano national identity.

ETHN 132. Chicanx Theatre (4)
(Cross-listed with TDHT 110.) This course examines Chicanx theatre as a dynamic, multi-vocal, aesthetically complex, and generative site for the exploration of Chicanx history, politics, and cultural identity. Students engage with a variety of plays and performance artists that track the different themes and inquiries that have emerged out of the Chicano Movement.

ETHN 133. Latinx Theatre and Performance (4)
(Cross-listed with TDHT 111.) This course examines performances from Latinx America that address issues of immigration, sexual politics, and gender, racial, and economic inequality among other topics. Students learn about how artists and communities use performance to explore a wealth of cultural practices and identities that have emerged alongside—and often in response to—the historical conditions that shape the disparate yet interconnected experiences of Latinx people living in the U.S. (colonialism, slavery, imperialism).

ETHN 134. Immigration and Ethnicity in Modern American Society (4)
(Cross-listed with HIUS 180.) Comparative study of immigration and ethnic group formation in the United States from 1880 to the present. Topics include immigrant adaptation, competing theories about the experiences of different ethnic groups, and the persistence of ethnic attachments in modern American society. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

ETHN 135A. Early Latino/a-Chicano/a Cultural Production: 1848 to 1960 (4)
(Cross-listed with LTSP 150A.) Cross-disciplinary study of nineteenth- and early twentieth-century Latino/a-Chicano/a literature, folklore, music, testimonio, or other cultural practices. Specific periods covered will fall between the immediate aftermath of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo to the Cuban revolution. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: LTSP 50A or LTSP 50B or LTSP 50C, or consent of instructor.

ETHN 135B. Contemporary Latino/a-Chicano/a Cultural Production: 1960 to Present (4)
(Cross-listed with LTSP 150B.) Cross-disciplinary study of late twentieth-century Latino/a-Chicano/a literature, the visual and performing arts, film, or other cultural practices. Specific periods covered will fall between the Kennedy years to the era of neoliberalism and the creation of “Hispanic” or Latino/a identities. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: LTSP 50A or LTSP 50B or LTSP 50C, or consent of instructor.

ETHN 136. The Science and Critical Analysis of Environmental Justice (4)
(Cross-listed with SIO 114.) Introduction to the scientific basis and critical analysis of environmental justice, with an emphasis on case studies, activism, and community engagement. This course will prepare students to critique and develop scientific models, research designs, and measurements consistent with environmental justice. Students may not receive credit for both ETHN 136 and SIO 114.

ETHN 137. Latina Issues and Cultural Production (4)
(Cross-listed with CGS 137.) This course will focus on the intersection of labor, class, race, ethnicity, gender, sexuality, and immigration in Latina cultural production. Examined from a socioeconomic, feminist, and cultural perspective, class readings will allow for historically grounded analyses of these issues. Course may be repeated as topics vary.

ETHN 138. Black and Latinx Crossing (4)
Explores the intersections of blackness, Chicanidad, and Latinidad in relation to each other, focusing on how these identities project, intersect, conflict, and complement each other. Combining cultural and historical analyses, we dissect these rallying banners through the lenses of race, gender, class, nation, pan-ethnicity, diaspora, colonialism, imperialism, citizenship, movement, and solidarity.

ETHN 139. Chicano Literature in English (4)
(Cross-listed with LTEN 180.) Introduction to the literature in English by the Chicano population, the men and women of Mexican descent who live and write in the United States. Primary focus on the contemporary period.

ETHN 140. Comparative Refugee Communities from Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia (4)
San Diego, California has the distinction of being home to one of the largest concentrations of refugees in the United States. Through this course, students will learn when, how, and why refugees from all over the world have resettled in San Diego and how they have adjusted to their local environments. Students will also have an opportunity to work with local refugee communities.

ETHN 140A. Refugee San Diego (4)
San Diego, California has the distinction of being home to one of the largest concentrations of refugees in the United States. Through this course, students will learn when, how, and why refugees from all over the world have resettled in San Diego and how they have adjusted to their local environments. Students will also have an opportunity to work with local refugee communities.

ETHN 141. Gandhi in the Modern World: From Civil Rights to the Arab Spring (4)
Martin Luther King was inspired by Gandhi, but in his own time, Gandhi was as controversial as he was revered. Nonviolence was not widely accepted as a form of political protest. This course explores Gandhi’s complex legacy of nonviolence for places and peoples embroiled in conflict.

ETHN 142. Medicine, Race, and the Global Politics of Inequality (4)
Globalization fosters both the transmission of AIDS, cholera, tuberculosis, and other infectious diseases and gross inequalities in the resources available to prevent and cure them. This course focuses on how race, ethnicity, gender, sexuality, class, and nation both shape and are shaped by the social construction of health and disease worldwide.

ETHN 143. Chicana/o Film and Media Studies (4)
This course is a historical survey of Chicana and Chicano media from roughly 1950 to the present. The goals of the course include learning about Chicana/o history, politics, and culture through different media and gaining the critical tools to analyze Chicana/o media and media more broadly.

ETHN 144M. Antiracist Medicine and New Perspectives in Health Care (4)
Medicine in the United States is sustained by inequities in racial, sexual, and dis/ability knowledge and practice. Health practitioners, patients, and scholars have argued for an antiracist medical education that explores power dynamics, stereotypes, and violence in medicine. This course utilizes an antiracist lens to examine medical knowledge and practice. Additionally, the course draws from the theoretical and narrative perspectives about health from artists, scholars, and activists.

ETHN 146A. Ensemble (4)
(Cross-listed with TDAC 120.) An intensive theatre practicum designed to generate theatre created by an ensemble, with particular emphasis upon the analysis of text. Students will explore and analyze scripts and authors. Ensemble segments include black theatre, Chicano theatre, feminist theatre, and commedia dell’arte. May be taken for credit two times.

ETHN 147. Black Feminisms, Past and Present (4)
(Cross-listed with CGS 147.) An advanced introduction to historical and contemporary black feminisms in the United States and transnationally. Students will explore the theory and practice of black feminists/womanists and analyze the significance of black feminism to contemporary understandings of race, class, gender, and sexuality.

ETHN 149. African American History in the Twentieth Century (4)
(Cross-listed with HIUS 139.) This course examines the transformation of African America across the expanse of the long twentieth century: imperialism, migration, urbanization, desegregation, and deindustrialization. Special emphasis will be placed on issues of culture, international relations, and urban politics.

ETHN 150. Visuality, Sexuality, and Race (4)
(Cross-listed with CGS 150.) Examines the role of the visual in power relations; the production of what we “see” regarding race and sexuality; the interconnected history of the casta system, plantation slavery, visuality, and contemporary society; decolonial and queer counternarratives to visuality.

ETHN 151. Ethnic Politics in America (4)
This course will survey the political effects of immigration, ethnic mobilization, and community building in America, and the contemporary role of ethnicity in politics and intergroup relations.

ETHN 152. Law and Civil Rights (4)
In this course, students explore the relationship between race, class, and law as it applies to civil rights both in a historical and a contemporary context. Topics include racism and the law, history of the Fourteenth Amendment, equal protection, school desegregation, and affirmative action.

ETHN 153. Citizenship and Civil Rights in the Twentieth Century (4)
(Cross-listed with HIUS 136.) This course traces the history of the institution of United States citizenship in the last century, tracing changing notions of racial, cultural, and gender differences, the evolution of the civil rights struggle, and changes in laws governing citizenship and access to rights.

ETHN 154. History of Mexican America (4)
(Cross-listed with HIUS 113.) This course explores the history of the largest minority population in the United States, focusing on the legacies of the Mexican War, the history of Mexican immigration and US-Mexican relations, and the struggle for citizenship and civil rights.

ETHN 155. US Militarism (4)
This course considers rationales for and responses to American military expansion as well as its social, environmental, and cultural consequences. We will examine racialized, gendered, and sexualized aspects of militarized institutions and practices, including militarized colonialism, tourism, and sex work. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or instructor approval.

ETHN 155GS. Critical Perspectives on the Vietnam War (4)
This course examines the impact of the Vietnam War on three populations: Americans, Vietnamese in Vietnam, and Viet Kieu (overseas Vietnamese). We will supplement scholarly texts on the war with films, literature, and visits to war museums and monuments. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: students must apply and be accepted into the Global Seminars program.

ETHN 157. Madness and Urbanization (4)
(Cross-listed with USP 149.) This course will provide a historical and theoretical orientation for contemporary studies of the experience of mental illness and mental health-care policy in the American city, with critical attention to racial and ethnic disparities in diagnosis, treatment, and outcomes. 

ETHN 158. Native American Intellectuals in the Twentieth Century (4)
This course examines Native American intellectuals’ work. It provides a broad historical perspective on the development of twentieth-century Native American political thinking and discusses the recurring issues, problems, and themes inherent to Indian-white relations, as seen from Indian perspectives.

ETHN 159. Topics in African American History (4)
(Cross-listed with HIUS 183.) A colloquium dealing with special topics in the history of people of African descent in the United States. Themes will vary from quarter to quarter. Requirements will vary for undergraduate, MA, and PhD students. Graduate students will be required to submit a more substantial piece of work.

ETHN 160. Global Indigenous Studies (4)
Focusing on transregional relationships to land and decolonization in the Pacific, Caribbean, and the Americas, this course is a comparative study of cultural and political phenomena that shape indigenous communities globally. We will examine enduring legacies of colonialism, nationalism, and Western normativities, and explore indigenous activism within the decolonial movement.

ETHN 162. Practicum in California Tribal Law and Journalism (4)
Work with California native tribal groups, leaders, and members to identify common, pressing questions surrounding Indian law. In partnership with legal experts, develop and disseminate new media programs and useful documents accessible to native communities throughout California.

ETHN 163E. Decolonial Theory (4)
Decolonial Theory will focus on historical and contemporary intellectual work produced by activists from colonized regions of the world. This course will be international in scope, but attentive to local struggles.

ETHN 163F. Playing Indian: Native American and First Nations Cinema (4)
(Cross-listed with TDGE 131.) This course examines recent movies by Native American/First Nations artists that labor to deconstruct and critique reductive stereotypes about America’s First Peoples in Hollywood cinema. Carving spaces of “visual sovereignty” (Raheja), these films propose complex narratives and characterizations of indigeneity. Students may not receive credit for TDGE 131, TDGE 131R, ETHN 163FR, and ETHN 163F.

ETHN 163FR. Playing Indian: Native American and First Nations Cinema (4)
(Cross-listed with TDGE 131R.) This online course examines recent movies by Native American/First Nations artists that labor to deconstruct and critique reductive stereotypes about America’s First Peoples in Hollywood cinema. Carving spaces of “visual sovereignty” (Raheja), these films propose complex narratives and characterizations of indigeneity. Students may not receive credit for TDGE 131, TDGE 131R, ETHN 163FR, and ETHN 163F.

ETHN 163G. Indigenous Theatre and Performance (4)
(Cross-listed with TDHT 120.) This theoretical and embodied course examines a selection of indigenous plays and performances (dance, hip hop) and helps students develop the critical vocabulary and contextual knowledge necessary to productively engage with the political and artistic interventions performed by these works. No prior knowledge in theatre history is needed. Students may not receive credit for TDHT 120 and ETHN 163G.

ETHN 163I. Asian American Histography (4)
(Cross-listed with HIUS 177.) This course introduces students to the field of Asian American history, with an emphasis on historiographical shifts and debates. It includes a wide range of topics and methodologies that cross disciplinary boundaries. Fulfills the race, ethnicity, and migration and global/transnational field requirements for the history major. Students may not receive credit for both ETHN 163I and HIUS 177. May be coscheduled with HIUS 277 and ETHN 273.

ETHN 163J. Asian American Social Movements (4)
(Cross-listed with HIUS 125.) This course introduces students to the history of Asian American social movements from the late-nineteenth century to the present, with an emphasis on interethnic, cross-racial, and transnational practices. Topics include immigration reform, antiwar and anticolonial movements, redress, hate crimes, and police brutality. Students may not receive credit for HIUS 125 and ETHN 163J.

ETHN 164. African Americans and the Mass Media (4)
(Cross-listed with MUS 153.) This course will examine the media representations of African Americans from slavery through the twentieth century. Attention will be paid to the emergence and transmission of enduring stereotypes, and their relationship to changing social, political, and economic frameworks in the United States. The course will also consider African Americans’ responses to and interpretations of these mediated images.

ETHN 165. Gender and Sexuality in African American Communities (4)
(Cross-listed with CGS 165.) This course will investigate the changing constructions of sex, gender, and sexuality in African American communities defined by historical period, region, and class. Topics will include the sexual division of labor, myths of black sexuality, the rise of black feminism, black masculinity, and queer politics.

ETHN 166. Arab/Muslim American Identity and Culture (4)
(Cross-listed with LTEN 179.) This class explores (self) representations of Muslim and Arab Americans in US popular culture with a focus on the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. Topics include the racing of religion, “the war on terror” in the media, feminism and Islam, immigration, race, and citizenship. May be repeated for credit three times when content varies.

ETHN 167. Muslim Identity in America (4)
This course is an introduction to the study of Muslims in the United States. It examines the ways in which questions of race, gender, and white settler colonial plantation state practices have shaped Muslim lives, both historically and in present times. Topics include the arrival of African Muslims in slave ships, growing Latinx Muslim presence, South Asian and Arab-American Muslims, immigrant-indigenous-black Muslim debates, media representation, resistance movements, and questions of national belonging. May be taken for credit up to two times when content varies.

ETHN 167A. Decolonial Muslim Feminisms (4)
This course is a pedagogical analysis of the connections between decolonial thinking and studies of Muslims, Islam, and the Islamicate. Students will explore contours of decolonial epistemologies in sacred and secular Muslim texts such as the Qur’an, Hadith, and other sites including those of law, borders, immigration, home, labor, desire, and fashion.

ETHN 168. Comparative Ethnic Literature (4)
(Cross-listed with LTEN 178.) A lecture-discussion course that juxtaposes the experience of two or more US ethnic groups and examines their relationship with the dominant culture. Students will analyze a variety of texts representing the history of ethnicity in this country. Topics will vary.

ETHN 169. Origins of the Atlantic World, c. 1450–1650 (4)
An examination of interactions among the peoples of western Europe, Africa, and the Americas that transformed the Atlantic basin into an interconnected “Atlantic World.” Topics will include maritime technology and the European Age of Discovery, colonization in the Americas, the beginnings of the transatlantic slave trade, and early development of plantation slavery in the New World. Students may not receive credit for both ETHN 170A and 169.

ETHN 170. Slavery and the Atlantic World (4)
The development of the Atlantic slave trade and the spread of racial slavery in the Americas before 1800. Explores the diversity of slave labor in the Americas and the different slave cultures African Americans produced under the constraints of slavery. Students may not receive credit for both ETHN 170 and 170B.

ETHN 172. Afro-American Prose (4)
(Cross-listed with LTEN 183.) Students will analyze and discuss the novel, the personal narrative, and other prose genres, with particular emphasis on the developing characters of Afro-American narrative and the cultural and social circumstances that influence their development.

ETHN 173GS. Gender, Sexuality, and War (4)
This course examines the effects of war and militarism on women’s lives, focusing in particular on the experiences of Vietnamese women during and in the aftermath of the Vietnam War. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: students must apply and be accepted into the Global Seminars program.

ETHN 174. Themes in Afro-American Literature (4)
(Cross-listed with LTEN 185.) This course focuses on the influence of slavery upon African American writers. Our concern is not upon what slavery was but upon what it is within the works and what these texts reveal about themselves, their authors, and their audiences.

ETHN 175. Literature of the Harlem Renaissance (4)
(Cross-listed with LTEN 186.) The Harlem Renaissance (1917–39) focuses on the emergence of the “New Negro” and the impact of this concept on black literature, art, and music. Writers studied include Claude McKay, Zora N. Hurston, and Langston Hughes. Special emphasis on new themes and forms.

ETHN 177. Race, Sound, and Music (4)
This course considers the history of listening to the music of the world in Western culture. We will critically examine how the history of perception directs us to listen for familiar and different sounds in music. No musical training required.

ETHN 178. Blues: An Oral Tradition (4)
(Cross-listed with MUS 126.) This course will examine the development of the blues from its roots in work-songs and the minstrel show to its flowering in the Mississippi Delta to the development of urban blues and the close relationship of the blues with jazz, rhythm and blues, and rock and roll.

ETHN 178R. Blues: An Oral Tradition (4)
(Cross-listed with MUS 126.) This online course will examine the development of the blues from its roots in work songs and the minstrel show to its flowering in the Mississippi Delta to the development of urban blues and the close relationship of the blues with jazz, rhythm and blues, and rock and roll. Students may receive credit for only one of the following courses: MUS 126, MUS 126R, ETHN 178, or ETHN 178R.

ETHN 179. Discover Jazz (4)
(Cross-listed with MUS 127.) Offers an introduction to jazz, including important performers and their associated styles and techniques. Explores the often-provocative role jazz has played in American and global society, the diverse perceptions and arguments that have surrounded its production and reception, and how these have been inflected by issues of race, class, gender, and sexuality. Specific topics vary from year to year. May be taken for credit two times. Students may receive a combined total of eight units for MUS 127 and ETHN 179.

ETHN 182. Race, Gender, and Sexuality in Fantasy and Science Fiction (4)
This course focuses on race, gender, and sexuality in twentieth- and twenty-first-century fantasy and science fiction. We will study literature, film, music, television, video games, and the internet in order to situate such speculative visions in historical and transmedia contexts.

ETHN 183. Gender, Race, Ethnicity, and Class (4)
(Cross-listed with CGS 114.) Gender is often neglected in studies of ethnic/racial politics. This seminar explores the relationship of race, ethnicity, class, and gender by examining the participation of working-class women of color in community politics and how they challenge mainstream political theory.

ETHN 186. Queer of Color Performance (4)
This course examines race and sexuality as performance. Performance studies analyze how social forms like gender, race, sexuality, nationality, belief, and ability are constructed, normalized, and reimagined. Through art and writing by queer people of color, we examine how culture is enacted not just in formal venues like theatres, but in public spaces, through institutions like the court, in film and literature, and in one’s relationships and communities.

ETHN 187. Latinx Sexualities (4)
(Cross-listed with CGS 187.) The construction and articulation of Latinx sexualities will be explored in this course through interdisciplinary and comparative perspectives. We will discuss how immigration, class, and norms of ethnicity, race, and gender determine the construction, expression, and reframing of Latinx sexualities.

ETHN 188. African Americans, Religion, and the City (4)
(Cross-listed with USP 132.) This course details the history of African American migration to urban areas after World War I and World War II and explores the role of religion in their lives as well as the impact that their religious experiences had upon the cities in which they lived.

ETHN 180. Topics in Mexican American History (4)
(Cross-listed with HIUS 167.) This colloquium studies the racial representation of Mexican Americans in the United States from the nineteenth century to the present, examining critically the theories and methods of the humanities and social sciences.

ETHN 184. Black Intellectuals in the Twentieth Century (4)
An analysis of black cultural and intellectual production since 1895. Course will explore how race and race-consciousness have influenced the dialogue between ideas and social experience; and how other factors—i.e., age, gender, and class—affected scholars’ insights.

ETHN 185. Discourse, Power, and Inequality (4)
While discourse analysis has transformed numerous disciplines, a gap separates perspectives that envision discourse as practices that construct inequality from approaches that treat discourse as everyday language. This course engages both perspectives critically in analyzing law, medicine, and popular culture.

ETHN 189. Special Topics in Ethnic Studies (4)
A reading and discussion course that explores special topics in ethnic studies. Themes will vary from quarter to quarter; therefore, course may be repeated three times as long as topics vary.

ETHN 190. Research Methods: Studying Racial and Ethnic Communities (4)
(Cross-listed with USP 129.) The course offers students the basic research methods with which to study ethnic and racial communities. The various topics to be explored include human and physical geography, transportation, employment, economic structure, cultural values, housing, health, education, and intergroup relations.

ETHN 196H. Honors Thesis in Ethnic Studies (4)
Independent study to complete an honors thesis under the supervision of a faculty member who serves as thesis adviser. Prerequisites: ETHN 100A and ETHN 100B and ETHN 100H. Department approval required.

ETHN 197. Fieldwork in Racial and Ethnic Communities (4)
This course comprises supervised community fieldwork on topics of importance to racial and ethnic communities in the greater San Diego area. Regular individual meetings with faculty sponsor and written reports are required. (May be repeated for credit.)

ETHN 198. Directed Group Studies in Ethnic Studies (4)
Directed group study on a topic or in a field not included in the regular department curriculum by special arrangement with a faculty member. (May be repeated for credit.)

ETHN 199. Supervised Independent Study and Research in Ethnic Studies (4)
Individual research on a topic that leads to the writing of a major paper. (May be repeated for credit.)

FILM 87. Film Studies First-year Student Seminar (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students. Prerequisites: none.

GLBH 20. Introduction to Global Health (4)
Provides a foundational interdisciplinary understanding of complex global health issues and introduces major concepts and principles in global health. The course surveys the range of problems contributing to the global burden of disease and disability including infectious disease, mental illness, refugee and immigrant health, natural disasters, climate change, and food insecurity.

GLBH 100. Special Topics in Global Health (4)
Selected topics in global health. Content will vary from quarter to quarter. May be taken for credit up to four times.

GLBH 101. Aging: Culture and Health in Late Life Human Development (4)
(Cross-listed with ANSC 101.) Examines aging as a process of human development from local and global perspectives. Focuses on the interrelationships of social, cultural, psychological, and health factors that shape the experience and well-being of aging populations. Students explore the challenges and wisdom of aging. Students may not receive credit for GLBH 101 and ANSC 101.

GLBH 102. Global Health Epidemiology (4)
This course will address basic epidemiology principles, concepts, and procedures that are used in investigation of health-related states or events from a global perspective. Explores study designs and methods appropriate for studies of incidence and prevalence, causality and prevention, with emphasis on research in resource-poor settings. Prerequisites: COGS 14B or MATH 11 or PSYC 60 and GLBH 20 or FMPH 40 and GLBH 181.

GLBH 103. Global Health Disparities and the Quest for Global Health Equity (4)
This course examines health and health care for racial and ethnic minorities in the United States. Students will explore explanations for why racial and ethnic minorities have poorer health outcomes and receive lower quality health care than other societal groups. Students will examine discrimination in health care settings, psychosocial stress and mental and physical health, and how the health care system generates disparate outcomes through interpersonal and institutional processes.

GLBH 104. Humanities, Ethics, and Professionalism: Engaging Moral Imaginaries for Exploring Health and the Human Condition (4)
Questions of morality are implicit in all aspects of health. Drawing insights from the medical humanities, this course engages students in thinking about the human condition (what it means to be human or dehumanized) from multiple perspectives: individual, social, civic. How do humans ascribe meaning to their lives? What does it take to flourish? What is empathy; for whom do we have it? What is ethical and just about the organization of society and its impact on health?

GLBH 105. Global Health and Inequality (4)
(Cross-listed with ANSC 105.) Why is there variation of health outcomes across the world? We will discuss health and illness in context of culture and address concerns in cross-national health variations by comparing health care systems in developed, underdeveloped, and developing countries. In addition, we’ll study the role of socioeconomic and political change in determining health outcomes, and examine social health determinants in contemporary global health problems—multidrug resistance to antibiotics, gender violence, human trafficking, etc. Students may receive credit for one of the following: GLBH 105, ANSC 105, ANSC 105S, or ANSC 105GS.

GLBH 106. Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene in Global Health (4)
This course provides an overview of water, sanitation, and hygiene (WaSH) in global health. We discuss the global burden of disease from inadequate access to WaSH services, survey the state of WaSH across the globe, learn about a range of WaSH technologies, examine the social, economic, and policy considerations important in WaSH planning and sustainability, and learn how to conduct a water safety test. Case studies from the Americas, South Asia, and sub-Saharan Africa will be discussed. It is recommended that students take GLBH 20, Introduction to Global Health, prior to enrolling in this course.

GLBH 107. Refugee Health in Local and Global Contexts (4)
This course provides an overview of the health worlds of forcibly displaced populations, focusing on the intersections of violence, migration, and globalization. Topics include infectious disease, mental health, health policy, and access to care. Specific case studies explored include Latin American migrant experiences in the U.S., Haitian migrant experiences in the Dominican Republic, African migrant experiences in France, and Afghan migrant experiences in Greece.

GLBH 108. Hispanic and Latinx Issues in Global Health (4)
This course aims to provide an educational setting for Latinx/Hispanic students to discuss critical perspectives in global health. The purpose is to think critically and creatively about global health development from an interdisciplinary approach. Themes to explore include research methodologies from decolonial perspectives, the role of morals and values in policy development, and the challenges of tackling global health problems in neoliberal societies.

GLBH 108S. The Indigenous Futures Lab (IFL) Field School: Enhancing Ethical Genomic Research with Indigenous Communities (4)
Currently 90 percent of genome studies and 95 percent of clinical trials exclusively feature individuals of European ancestry. This bias and systematic lack of engagement of Indigenous people in both clinical trials and genome studies is partially the result of a history of distrust. Through our field school, we will train the next generation of global health professionals to imagine, promote, and sustain a future where Indigenous people are partners in and not subjects of genetic research. Program or materials fees may apply.

GLBH 109. Decolonizing Global Health (4)
This course aims to provide epistemological, theoretical, and methodological perspectives to approach global health from a decolonial stance. We will analyze the colonial legacies in global health to discuss the challenges of pursuing a change in the field. Themes to explore include the westernization of knowledge in health, decolonizing global health education, colonialism as a social determinant of health, decolonial research methodologies, and dismantling colonialism in health care systems.

GLBH 110. Demography and Social Networks in Global Health (4)
This course will provide an overview of demographic principles, and their associations with maternal and child health outcomes. We will focus on demographic trends in developing countries, using research from the DHS to discuss inequalities in fertility, mortality, and morbidity. The remainder of the class will question why we see such spatial variation in many maternal and child health outcomes, with a focus on theories of social norms, and social network methods for uncovering those trends.

GLBH 111. Clinic on the Border: Health Frontiers in Tijuana (4)
Introduces students to the physical and mental health needs of vulnerable migrants and socially marginalized communities, including substance users, LGBTQ, deportees, and the homeless and medically indigent. Students will become integrated into a free clinic in Tijuana where they will obtain community-based field experiences in interacting with these populations; learn about delivering evidence-based health care in underserved settings and be introduced to issues regarding cultural appropriation. Program or materials fees may apply. May be taken for credit up to three times. Students are required to cross the US-Mexico border to attend clinic in Tijuana as part of the requirements for the course. Recommended preparation: upper-division global health course work prior to participation is recommended.

GLBH 112. Medicine, Global Health, and Bioethics (4)
This course explores the global medical commons via current topics in medical anthropology and sociology, including learning medicine, the work of doctoring, the culture of biomedicine and the clinic, the political economy of health care, the ethics of care at the end of life, and medical rationing. We will examine how medical knowledge, ethical practice, research, and technology are culturally shaped and institutionally organized in different societies.

GLBH 113. Women’s Health in Global Perspective (4)
The course examines women’s and girls’ health throughout the world, focusing on the main health problems experienced primarily in low resource settings. This course presents issues in the context of a woman’s life from childhood, through adolescence, reproductive years, and aging. The course will have a strong emphasis on social, economic, environmental, behavioral, and political factors that affect health behaviors, reproductive health, maternal morbidity/mortality, and STIs/HIV.

GLBH 114. Latin American Health and Healing (4)
This course aims to analyze the health and healing processes in Latin America. Students will understand the social, cultural, political, and economic aspects traversing those processes. We will analyze biomedical health care systems and intercultural health practices at structural, community, and individual levels based on specific cases. Finally, alternative health care services and self-care practices will be discussed to understand health and healing experiences in specific contexts.

GLBH 114W. Communication and Social Institutions: Global Health Communication (4)
Public health campaigns attempt to change behavior, slow the spread of disease, and improve the health of a population. This course takes a critical social science perspective on the production, dissemination, and impacts (intended and otherwise) of public health communication, including questions of coercion, autonomy, and perceptions of collective health and well-being.

GLBH 115. Social Justice and Health Equity: The Intellectual Legacy of Paul Farmer (4)
This course examines the legacy of Dr. Paul Farmer. Dr. Farmer used a strong moral focus on equity and social justice and an anthropologically informed analysis of health to deliver life-saving HIV medications around the world and strengthen national health systems. Through a mix of readings and case study reviews, this course will help students understand how theory, social science research, and medicine can be combined to directly help improve the health of the most vulnerable among us.

GLBH 116. Infectious Disease (4)
This course will analyze outbreaks of infectious diseases to understand how the interests of one country are inevitably linked to the health of people in all other countries around the world, with an emphasis on understanding the critical intersection of policy, social expectations in determining how health systems function and adapt to address new challenges, and examining why some health systems are so fragile in the face of new disease challenges such as the COVID-19 pandemic.

GLBH 117. Global Health and Non-Communicable Diseases (4)
Non-communicable diseases (NCDs) such as cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, obesity, cancer, lung diseases, and depression are a growing problem in low- and middle-income countries. NCDs present great challenges to global health, even considering the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The course explores the consequences of multimorbidity, aging and low access to health care on NCDs and social inequalities, and how to guide prevention efforts for NCD risk factors.

GLBH 118. Placing People First: Introduction to the Global Health Humanities (4)
This course explores global health issues through the lens of the arts and humanities disciplines—a multidisciplinary area that investigates the human and social aspects of health and medicine. Using humanities exploratory tools, students will gain humanistic insights into global health issues for the purpose of generating a historical and holistic consciousness of health and health disparities.

GLBH 129. Meaning and Healing (4)
(Cross-listed with ANSC 129.) This course examines the nature of healing across cultures, with special emphasis on religious and ritual healing. Students may not receive credit for GLBH 129 and ANSC 129.

GLBH 139. Native American Health and Healing (4)
(Cross-listed with ANSC 139.) This course examines fact and fiction with respect to epidemics of contagious diseases including smallpox and tuberculosis, alcohol and drug dependency, diabetes and obesity, depression and suicide. We analyze health care with respect to the history and development of the Indian Health Service, health care efforts by Christian missionaries, tribal-led health initiatives, indigenous spiritual healing, and collaborations between indigenous healers and biomedical professionals. Students may not receive credit for ANSC 139 and GLBH 139. ANSC 139/GLBH 139 may be coscheduled with ANTH 237/GLBH 245.

GLBH 141. Clinical Perspectives in Global Health (4)
This course aims to understand the salient aspects of global health from the point of view of the clinician who translates epidemiological knowledge into treatment approaches for their patients. The perspective of the clinician illuminates that of the patient and allows us to understand public health on the front line. The course will examine many aspects of global health from the point of view of the clinicians involved, whose perspectives will help illuminate those of their patients. May be coscheduled with GLBH 241.

GLBH 142. “When the field is a ward”: Ethnographies of the Clinic (4)
The purpose of this course is to introduce ethnography as a strategy to conduct research on clinical contexts. During the first part of the course, students will learn about the ethnographic method, and how both qualitative research and ethnography may be utilized in healthcare and medical education. The course will also examine some key limitations to these methods.

GLBH 143. Mental Health as Global Health Priority (4)
(Cross-listed with ANSC 143.) Why is mental health a global concern? This anthropological course reviews globalization, culture, and mental health. We examine issues of social suffering, stigma, and economic burden associated with mental illness, gender inequality, political violence, “global security,” and pharmaceutical and illegal drugs. May be coscheduled with ANTH 243. Students may not receive credit for both ANSC 143 and GLBH 143.

GLBH 146. A Global Health Perspective on HIV (4)
(Cross-listed with ANSC 146.) An introductory course to HIV taught through a medical student format, with emphasis on research and experiential learning, including observation of physicians providing care for patients from diverse socioeconomic and cultural backgrounds, and who may be underinsured or uninsured, homeless, and/or immigrants. Students may not receive credit for ANSC 146 and GLBH 146.

GLBH 147. Global Health and the Environment (4)
(Cross-listed with ANSC 147.) Examines interactions of culture, health, and environment. Rural and urban human ecologies, their energy foundations, sociocultural systems, and characteristic health and environmental problems are explored. The role of culture and human values in designing solutions will be investigated. Students may not receive credit for GLBH 147 and ANSC 147.

GLBH 148. Global Health and Cultural Diversity (4)
(Cross-listed with ANSC 148.) Introduction to global health from the perspective of medical anthropology on disease and illness, cultural conceptions of health, doctor-patient interaction, illness experience, medical science and technology, mental health, infectious disease, and health care inequalities by ethnicity, gender, and socioeconomic status. Students may not receive credit for GLBH 148 and ANSC 148.

GLBH 150. Culture and Mental Health (4)
(Cross-listed with ANSC 150.) This course reviews mental health cross-culturally and transnationally. Issues examined are cultural shaping of the interpretation, experience, symptoms, treatment, course, and recovery of mental illness. World Health Organization findings of better outcomes in non-European and North American countries are explored. Students may not receive credit for GLBH 150 and ANSC 150.

GLBH 150A. Global Health Horizons Honors Thesis Seminar I (4)
This course will consist of intensive reading and discussion in fields related to each student’s primary interest and building on their Global Health Field Experience that will culminate into an honors thesis. Prerequisites: department approval required.

GLBH 150B. Global Health Horizons Honors Thesis Seminar II (4)
This course will be a workshop with critical input from all participants focusing on preparing a final thesis paper. Prerequisites: GLBH 150A; department approval required.

GLBH 160. Global Health Policy (4)
Students will learn fundamental principles and concepts of global health policy, law, and governance. The course will focus on identifying critical global health policy challenges and solving them using a multidisciplinary approach that takes into account the perspectives of various stakeholders. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

GLBH 171R. Global Mental Health (4)
Global Mental Health (GMH) is a field of research, practice, and advocacy prioritizing mental health for all persons and communities worldwide. GMH recognizes mental, neurological, or substance use disorders as the leading causes of disability worldwide and works to counteract social stigma and discrimination commonly associated with such conditions. The course introduces this interdisciplinary field based on analysis of and writing about critical sources from the relevant scholarly literature.

GLBH 173. Substance Use and Global Mental Health: Case Studies for Research and Praxis (4)
Psychoactive substance use, or drug use, is a rapidly growing global health concern. This course examines local and global case studies of substance use and its treatment through global health frameworks for social justice and health equity. Topics include the comorbidity of drug use with other mental health problems, the relationship between drug use and poverty/social inequity, the “War on Drugs,” available treatment options, and emerging technologies to aid recovery.

GLBH 181. Essentials of Global Health (4)
Illustrates and explores ecologic settings and frameworks for study and understanding of global health and international health policy. Students acquire understanding of diverse determinants and trends of disease in various settings and interrelationships between socio-cultural-economic development and health.

GLBH 195. Instructional Apprenticeship in Global Health (4)
Course gives students experience in teaching global health courses. Students, under direction of instructor, lead discussion sections, attend lectures, review course readings, and meet regularly to prepare course materials and to evaluate examinations and papers. Students will need to apply for the undergraduate instructional apprentice position through ASES, fulfill the Academic Senate regulations, and receive the approval of the department, instructor, department chair, and Academic Senate. May be taken for credit up to two times. Course cannot be used to fulfill requirements for the global health major or minor.

GLBH 196. Global Health and Social Justice Seminar (1)
Through Alternative Breaks: Public Health Program in the Center for Student Involvement, students explore aspects of the historical, political, economic, and social context of the issues surrounding access to healthcare and develop hard and soft skills needed to perform a successful public health outreach in Indonesia. May be taken for credit up to three times. Students must be accepted into the Alternative Breaks Program to enroll in the course. Prerequisites: department approval required.

GLBH 197. Global Health Academic Internship Program (4)
Offers global health students the opportunity to intern and gain credit for their global health field experience requirement. Students will intern and work with a faculty adviser to elaborate on the intellectual analysis and critique of the field experience. Students must complete the AIP application process and have the consent of a faculty adviser. May be taken for credit up to two times. Must be taken for a letter grade to fulfill requirements for the global health major or minor.

GLBH 198. Directed Group Study (4)
Directed group study for students to delve deeper into global health topics or elaborate the intellectual analysis and critique of their field experience. For students enrolled in the global health major or minor. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: department approval required.

GLBH 199. Independent Study in Global Health Field Experience (4)
Independent study opportunity for students to work with global health affiliated faculty on relevant research or to elaborate the intellectual analysis and critique of their global health field experience. For students enrolled in the global health major or minor. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: department approval required.

GSS 132. Literature and Global South Societies (4)
This course will investigate novelistic and dramatic treatments of European society in the era of nineteenth-century imperialism, Global South societies under the impact of colonialism, and the position of national minorities inside the United States to the present day. Attention will center on the interplay between the aesthetic merits and social-historical-philosophical content of the works read.

GSS 190. Undergraduate Seminars (4)
Seminars will be organized on the basis of topics with readings, discussions, and papers. Specific subjects to be covered will change each quarter depending on particular interest of instructors or students. May be repeated for credit.

GSS 197. Fieldwork (4)
In an attempt to explore and study some unique processes and aspects of community life, students will engage in research in field settings. Topics to be researched may vary, but in each case the course will provide skills for carrying out these studies.

GSS 198. Directed Group Studies (2 or 4)
Directed group study on a topic or in a field not included in the regular department curriculum, by special arrangement with a faculty member. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

GSS 199. Independent Study (2 or 4)
Tutorial, individual guided reading and research projects (to be arranged between student and instructor) in an area not normally covered in courses currently being offered in the department. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: upper-division standing and consent of instructor. (F,W,S)

GSS 20. Introduction to Global South Studies (4)
This introductory course examines historical and theoretical debates on the Global South. Especially important are socioeconomic, political, as well as cultural processes, as they are key factors to understanding the Global South across the globe.

GSS 21-22-23-25-26-27. History, Culture, and Politics of the Global South (4-4-4-4-4-4)
An introduction to the history, culture, and politics of various regions of the Global South through multidisciplinary approaches and readings. Topics will vary each quarter. (F,W,S)

GSS 21. Africa: History, Culture, and Politics
GSS 22. Latin America and the Caribbean: History, Culture, and Politics
GSS 23. China and East Asia: History, Culture, and Politics
GSS 25. Middle East: History, Culture, and Politics
GSS 26. South Asia: History, Culture, and Politics
GSS 27. Southeast Asia: History, Culture, and Politics

HILD 2A-B-C. United States (4-4-4)
A yearlong lower-division course that will provide students with a background in United States history from colonial times to the present, concentrating on social, economic, and political developments. (Satisfies Muir College humanities requirement and American History and Institutions requirement.)

HILD 7A-B-C. Race and Ethnicity in the United States (4-4-4)
Lectures and discussions surveying the topics of race, slavery, demographic patterns, ethnic variety, rural and urban life in the United States, with special focus on European, Asian, and Mexican immigration.

HILD 7A. Race and Ethnicity in the United States (4)
A lecture-discussion course on the comparative ethnic history of the United States. Of central concern will be the African American, slavery, race, oppression, mass migrations, ethnicity, city life in industrial America, and power and protest in modern America.

HILD 7B. Race and Ethnicity in the United States (4)
A lecture-discussion course on the comparative ethnic history of the United States. Of central concern will be the Asian American and white ethnic groups, race, oppression, mass migrations, ethnicity, city life in industrial America, and power and protest in modern America.

HILD 7C. Race and Ethnicity in the United States (4)
A lecture-discussion course on the comparative ethnic history of the United States. Of central concern will be the Mexican American, race, oppression, mass migrations, ethnicity, city life in industrial America, and power and protest in modern America.

HILD 7GS. Race and Ethnicity in the Global World (4)
Lectures and discussions surveying the topics of race, slavery, demographic patterns, ethnic variety, and rural and urban life in the United States, with special focus on European, Asian, and Mexican immigration. Program or materials fees may apply. May be taken for credit up to three times. Students must apply and be accepted into the Global Seminars Program.

HILD 8GS. Race and Ethnicity in the United States (4)
A lecture-discussion course on the comparative ethnic history of the United States. Of central concern will be the Mexican American, race, oppression, mass migrations, ethnicity, city life in industrial America, and power and protest in modern America. Students may not receive credit for HILD 8GS and HILD 7C. Program or materials fees may apply. Students must apply and be accepted into the Global Seminars Program.

HILD 10. East Asia: The Great Tradition (4)
The East Asia survey compares and contrasts the development of China, Korea, and Japan from ancient times to the present. This course explores the evolution of civilization from the first writing through classical Hei’an Japan, aristocratic Koryo, and late imperial Song China. Primary and secondary readings on basic ideas, institutions, and practices of the Confucian, Daoist, and Buddhist paths and of the state and family.

HILD 11. East Asia and the West, 1279–1911 (4)
The East Asia survey compares and contrasts the development of China, Korea, and Japan from ancient times to the present. From the Mongol conquests through China’s and Korea’s last dynasties, and the rise of Meiji Japan, this course examines political, institutional, and cultural ruptures and continuities as East Asia responded to the challenges of Western imperialism with defense, reform, conservative reaction, and creative imitation.

HILD 12. Twentieth-Century East Asia (4)
The East Asia survey compares and contrasts the development of China, Korea, and Japan from ancient times to the present. This course examines the emergence of a regionally dominant Japan before and after World War II; the process of revolution and state-building in China during the nationalist and communist eras; and Korea’s encounter with colonialism, nationalism, war, revolution, and industrialization.

HILD 14. Film and History in Latin America (4)
Students watch films on Latin America and compare them to historical research on similar episodes or issues. Films will vary each year but will focus on the social and psychological consequences of colonialism, forced labor, religious beliefs, and “Modernization.”

HILD 20. World History I: Ancient to Medieval (4)
This course provides an introduction to the culture, environmental context, and sociopolitical outlook of ancient civilizations, and traces historical change, from the emergence of classical empires to their collapse and transformation into medieval forms. The course also explores the development and spread of major world religions. Students may not receive credit for both HILD 20 and HILD 20R.

HILD 20R. World History I: Ancient to Medieval (4)
This online course provides an introduction to the culture, environmental context, and sociopolitical outlook of ancient civilizations, and traces historical change, from the emergence of classical empires to their collapse and transformation into medieval forms. The online course also explores the development and spread of major world religions. Students may not receive credit for both HILD 20 and HILD 20R.

HILD 30. History of Public Health (4)
Explores the history of public health, from the plague hospitals of Renaissance Italy to the current and future prospects for global health initiatives, emphasizing the complex biological, cultural, and social dimensions of health, sickness, and medicine across time and space.

HILD 30GS. History of Public Health (4)
Explores the history of public health from the plague hospitals of Renaissance Italy to the current and future prospects for global health initiatives, emphasizing the complex biological, cultural, and social dimensions of health, sickness, and medicine across time and space. Program or materials fees may apply. Students may not receive credit for both HILD 30 and HILD 30GS. Students must apply to and be accepted into the Global Seminar Program.

HILD 40. Anthropocene 1: The Neolithic (4)
Examines controversial hypothesis that humans have had a significant impact on the Earth’s climate and ecosystems over the past 8,000 years by focusing on the origins of settled agriculture and its environmental implications, including effects on greenhouse gas emissions. +

HILD 41. Anthropocene 2: The First Global Era, 1400–1750 (4)
A lecture-discussion course on the reintegration of the eastern and western hemispheres following 1492, tracking the movements of peoples, foodstuffs, livestock, and diseases, and assessing the vast and irreversible environmental and social impact of these transformations. +

HILD 42. Anthropocene 3: The Industrial Revolutions (4)
This course explores the fossil fuel age, from the steam engine to aerial warfare, analyzing the economics of coal and oil, the environmental impacts of industrial agriculture, deep-pit mining and extractive imperialism, and the building of the electrical grid.

HILD 43. Anthropocene 4: The Great Acceleration, 1945–Present (4)
Explores the intensification of industrialization and urbanization and their environmental impact, including skyrocketing greenhouse gas emissions, air and water pollution, soil depletion, and deforestation. Also, analyzes different environmentalisms and imagines futures distinct from climate catastrophe.

HILD 50. Introduction to Law and Society (4)
A survey of contemporary issues concerning law and society, with emphasis on historical analysis and context. Satisfies the lower-division requirement for the law and society minor.

HILD 60. Global Black History through Biography (4)
This course touches upon prominent themes in global black history through the study of impactful black figures. These people and their experiences shine a light on some of the most momentous, compelling, and fascinating events to have shaped world history from the seventeenth century to the present day. The topics of analysis will include the struggle against European colonialism, activism carried out by athletes and musicians, and international campaigns against U.S. racial violence.

HIAF 111. Modern Africa since 1880 (4)
A survey of African history dealing with the European scramble for territory, primary resistance movements, the rise of nationalism and the response of metropolitan powers, the transfer of power, self-rule and military coups, and the quest for identity and unity.

HIAF 112. West Africa since 1880 (4)
West Africa from the nineteenth century onwards and examines the broad outlines of historical developments in the subregion through the twentieth century, including such themes as religious, political, and social changes.

HIAF 113. Small Wars and the Global Order: Africa and Asia (4)
Examines the traumas, interrelation, and global repercussions of national conflicts (“small wars”) in the postcolonial world. Focus on Africa and Asia from the Cold War to the present with particular attention to the intersection of foreign interests, insurgency, and geopolitics.

HIAF 114. Black Internationalism (4)
This class investigates how Black peoples were central to the making and unmaking of empires and the ways they sought to forge transnational Black liberation linkages. It focuses on Africa, the US, and the Caribbean as important nodes of Black internationalism.

HIAF 120. History of South Africa (4)
The origins and the interaction between the peoples of South Africa. Special attention will be devoted to industrial development, urbanization, African and Afrikaner nationalism, and the origin and development of apartheid and its consequences.

HIAF 123. West Africa from Earliest Times to 1800 (4)
Plant and animal domestication, ironworking and the distribution of ethnic/language groups, urbanization, regional and long-distance commerce, and the rise of medieval kingdoms. +

HIAF 130. African Society and the Slave Trade (4)
Topics include trans-Saharan trade, slavery within African societies, Atlantic slave trade, East African slave trade, problems of numbers exported and profitability, impact of slave trade on African societies, and the abolition of the slave trade.

HIAF 161. Special Topics in African History (4)
This colloquium is intended for students with sufficient background in African history. Topics, which vary from year to year, will include traditional political, economic, and religious systems, and theory and practice of indirect rule, decolonization, African socialism, and pan-Africanism. May be taken for credit up to five times. Department approval required; may be coscheduled with HIAF 261.

HIAF 199. Independent Study in African History (4)
Directed readings for undergraduates. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and academic adviser required.

HIEA 111. Japan: Twelfth- to Mid-Nineteenth Centuries (4)
Covers important political issues—such as the medieval decentralization of state power, unification in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the Tokugawa system of rule, and conflicts between rulers and ruled—while examining long-term changes in economy, society, and culture. +

HIEA 112. Japan: From the Mid-Nineteenth Century through the US Occupation (4)
Topics include the Meiji Restoration, nationalism, industrialization, imperialism, Taisho Democracy, and the Occupation. Special attention will be given to the costs as well as benefits of “modernization” and the relations between dominant and subordinated cultures and groups within Japan.

HIEA 113. The Fifteen-Year War in Asia and the Pacific (4)
Lecture-discussion course approaching the 1931–1945 war through various “local,” rather than simply national, experiences. Perspectives examined include those of marginalized groups within Japan, Japanese Americans, Pacific Islanders, and other elites and nonelites in Asian and Pacific settings.

HIEA 114. Postwar Japan (4)
Examines social, cultural, political, and economic transformations and continuities in Japan since World War II. Emphases will differ by instructor.

HIEA 115. Social and Cultural History of Twentieth-Century Japan (4)
Japanese culture and society changed dramatically during the twentieth century. This course will focus on the transformation of cultural codes into what we know as “Japanese,” the politics of culture, and the interaction between individuals and society.

HIEA 116. Japan-U.S. Relations (4)
Survey of relations between Japan and the United States in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Although the focus will be on these nation-states, the course will be framed within the global transformation of societies. Topics include cultural frameworks, political and economic changes, colonialism and imperialism, and migration.

HIEA 117. Ghosts in Japan (4)
By examining the roles of ghosts in Japanese belief systems in a nonscientific age, this course addresses topics including folk beliefs and ghost stories, religiosity, early science, tools of amelioration and authoritative knowledge, and the relationship between myth and history.

HIEA 122. Late Imperial Chinese Culture and Society (4)
We read primary and secondary sources to study aspects of culture, society, religions, economy, government, family, gender, class, and individual lives from the tenth through the eighteenth centuries, Song through Qing. Recommended preparation: previous course work on China helpful but not required. May be taken for credit four times with department approval. Prerequisites: upper-division; department approval. +

HIEA 123. China under the Ming Dynasty (1368–1644) (4)
Ming history from its beginnings under Mongol rule until its fall to rebels and the Manchus. We study government and society under each of the sixteen emperors, and major events like the Zheng He voyages and the first Sino-Japanese War. Recommended preparation: HILD 11. + 

HIEA 124. Life in Ming China (1369–1644) (4)
We read primary and secondary sources to explore the experiences, worldview, and relationships of Ming men and women, variously including emperors and empresses, scholar-officials, upper-class wives, merchants, weavers, painters, eunuchs, Daoists, fighting monks, farmers, actors, gardeners, courtesans, soldiers, and pirates. +

HIEA 125. Women and Gender in East Asia (4)
The impact of modern transformations on female roles and gender relations in China, Japan, and Korea, focusing on the late imperial/early modern periods through the twentieth century.

HIEA 126. The Silk Road in Chinese and Japanese History (4)
This course studies the peoples, cultures, religions, economics, arts, and technologies of the trade routes known collectively as the Silk Road from c. 200 BCE to 1000 CE. We will use an interdisciplinary approach. Primary sources will include written texts and visual materials. We will examine these trade routes as an early example of globalization. +

HIEA 129. Faces of the Chinese Past (4)
Through primary and secondary readings on the lives of individual prominent and ordinary men and women from China’s past, we explore the relation of the individual to social structures and accepted norms; personal relationships; and the creation of historical sources. +

HIEA 130. End of the Chinese Empire, 1800–1911 (4)
From the Opium War to the 1911 Revolution. Key topics include ethnic identity under Manchu rule, the impact of Western imperialism, the Taiping and other rebellions, overseas Chinese, social change and currents of reform, and the rise of Chinese nationalism.

HIEA 131. China in War and Revolution, 1911–1949 (4)
An exploration of the formative period of the twentieth-century Chinese Revolution: the New Culture Movement, modern urban culture, the nature of Nationalist (Guomindang) rule, war with Japan, revolutionary nationalism, and the Chinese Communist rise to power.

HIEA 132. Mao’s China, 1949–1976 (4)
This course analyzes the history of the PRC from 1949 to the present. Special emphasis is placed on the problem of postrevolutionary institutionalization, the role of ideology, the tension between city and countryside, Maoism, the Great Leap Forward, the Cultural Revolution.

HIEA 133. Twentieth-Century China: Cultural History (4)
This course looks at how the historical problems of twentieth-century China are treated in the popular and elite cultures of the Nationalist and Communist eras. Special emphasis is placed on film and fiction.

HIEA 134. History of Thought and Religion in China: Confucianism (4)
Course will take up one of the main traditions of Chinese thought or religion, Confucianism, and trace it from its origins to the present. The course will explain the system of thought and trace it as it changes through history and within human lives and institutions. +

HIEA 137. Women and the Family in Chinese History (4)
The course explores the institutions of family and marriage, and women’s roles and experiences within the family and beyond, from classical times to the early twentieth century. +

HIEA 138. Women and the Chinese Revolution (4)
Examines women’s roles and experiences in the twentieth-century Chinese revolution, the ways in which women participated in the process of historical change, the question of to what extent the revolution “liberated” women from “Confucian tradition.”

HIEA 139GS. An Introduction to Southeast Asia (circa 800–1900) (4)
This course provides an overview of Southeast Asian culture and history from 800 to the age of imperialism. It addresses regional geography, diversity, religion, political and social structures, mercantile and cultural ties abroad, the arrival of Islam, and the region’s changing relationship with European and Asian power. Students must apply and be accepted into the Global Seminars Program.

HIEA 140. China since 1978 (4)
Examines China’s attempts to manage the movements of people, ideas, and trade across its borders since 1900. How much control do individual countries such as China have over global processes? Special emphasis will be placed on global contexts and the impacts of China’s decision to reintegrate its society and economy with capitalist countries since 1978. Recommended preparation: previous course work on China helpful but not required.

HIEA 140R. China since 1978 (4)
This online course examines China’s attempts to manage the movements of people, ideas, and trade across its borders since 1900. How much control do individual countries such as China have over global processes? Special emphasis will be placed on global contexts and the impacts of China’s decision to reintegrate its society and economy with capitalist countries since 1978. This course is a distance education course. Students may not receive credit for both HIEA 140R and HIEA 140. Recommended preparation: previous course work on China helpful but not required.

HIEA 144. Topics in East Asian History (4)
Selected topics in East Asian History. Course may be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

HIEA 150. Modern Korea, 1800–1945 (4)
This course examines Korea’s entrance into the modern world. It utilizes both textual and audio-visual materials to explore local engagements with global phenomenon, such as imperialism, nationalism, capitalism, and socialism. HILD 10, 11, and/or 12 recommended.

HIEA 151. The Two Koreas, 1945–Present (4)
This course traces the peninsula’s division into two rival regimes. It utilizes both textual and audio-visual materials to reveal the varied experiences of North and South Koreans with authoritarianism, industrialization, and globalization. HILD 10, 11, and/or 12 recommended.

HIEA 152. History and Cultures of the Korean Diaspora (4)
This course places the Korean diaspora in national, regional, and global frames from the imperial age to our globalized present. It traces migrant experiences and community formations on the peninsula and in Japan, the United States, China, and the former USSR.

HIEA 153. Social and Cultural History of Twentieth-Century Korea (4)
This course explores the cultural and social structures that dominated twentieth-century Korea: imperialism, ethnonationalism, heteropatriarchy, capitalism, socialism, and militarism. It also uses individual and collective engagements with these hegemonic structures to demonstrate contentious interactions between individuals and society.

HIEA 154. Korean History Through Film (4)
Recognizing that the past is a multi-media process of knowledge production, this course uses a variety of films (i.e., features, shorts, and documentaries) to study how directors have visualized modern Korean history. Students will juxtapose the narratives of Korean films with academic accounts of Korean history to understand how representations of the past are produced, disseminated, contested, and interpreted. Writing exercise will develop students’ critical and analytical skills.

HIEA 155. China and the Environment (4)
This course covers key themes in the history of interactions between humans and the environment in China over the past 3,000 years, generating a fuller understanding of China’s present-day environmental problems by situating them in a broader historical context. +

HIEA 163/263. Cinema and Society in Twentieth-Century China (4)
This colloquium will explore the relationship between cinema and society in twentieth-century China. The emphasis will be on the social, political, and cultural impact of filmmaking. The specific period under examination (1930s, 1940s, post-1949) may vary each quarter. Graduate students will be expected to submit an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.

HIEA 164/264. Seminar in Late Imperial Chinese History (4)
We read primary and accessible historical scholarship (including fiction) on state, society, religion, culture, and individual lives in Song through Qing times. May be taken for credit three times. May be coscheduled with HIEA 264. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp. +

HIEA 166/266. Creating Ming Histories (4)
Ming was considered absolutist, closed, and stagnant. Nowadays its vibrant economy and culture are celebrated. We pair scholarship with primary sources to explore Ming’s complexities and learn how historians work. May be coscheduled with HIEA 266. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp. +

HIEA 168/268. Topics in Classical and Medieval Chinese History (4)
Chinese society, thought, religion, culture, economy and politics from the Shang through the Song dynasties, through primary and secondary sources. Topics vary; may be repeated for credit. Requirements differ for undergraduate, MA and PhD students. Graduate students will be required to submit a more substantial piece of work or an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor and department stamp. +

HIEA 170. Love and Marriage in Chinese History (4)
Examines ideas and practices of love and marriage in Chinese history, including changes and continuities in China’s twentieth-century revolution and reform. Course readings range from literary and philosophical sources to personal records from the classical age to the modern era. Department approval required. May be coscheduled with HIEA 270. +

HIEA 171/271. Society and Culture in Premodern China (4)
Explores premodern Chinese society and culture through the reading and discussion of classics and masterpieces in history. Examines how values and ideas were represented in the texts and how they differed, developed, or shifted over time. Requirements will vary for undergraduate, MA, and PhD students. Graduate students are required to submit an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing, department stamp. +

HIEA 180. Topics in Modern Korean History (4)
This colloquium will examine selected topics in modern Korean history through both primary sources (in translation) and secondary sources. Topics will vary year to year. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and department stamp.

HIEA 190M/HIEA 290M. Special Topics in East Asian Modern History (4)
This course looks at topics in East Asian history in the modern era (post 1800). May be coscheduled with HIEA 290M. May be taken for credit up to five times. Topics will vary from year to year. Department approval required.

HIEA 198. Directed Group Study (4)
Directed group study on a topic not generally included in the regular curriculum. Students must make arrangements with individual faculty members. May be taken for credit up to three times. Department approval required.

HIEA 199. Independent Study in East Asian History (4)
Directed reading for undergraduates under the supervision of various faculty members. Prerequisites: consent of instructor required.

HIEU 102. Roman History (4)
The course treats the history of Rome from the foundation of the city in the eighth century BC until the end of the Flavian dynasty in 96 AD. It focuses particularly on the political, social, and cultural elements that fueled Roman development and expansion. +

HIEU 102A. Ancient Roman Civilization (4)
The political, economic, and intellectual history of the Roman world from the foundation of Rome to the disintegration of the Western empire. This course will emphasize the importance of the political and cultural contributions of Rome to modern society. +

HIEU 103. Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (4)
This course discusses the history of imperial Rome and its successor states between the second and seventh centuries AD. It considers whether the Roman Empire fell or if one should instead speak of Roman continuity amidst political and religious change. +

HIEU 104. Byzantine Empire (4)
A survey course of the history of the Byzantine state from the reign of Constantine to the fall of Constantinople. This course will emphasize the importance of the Byzantine state within a larger European focus, its relationship to the emerging Arab states, its political and cultural contributions to Russia and the late medieval west. +

HIEU 105S. Devotions, Doctrines, and Divisions: Religion in Early Modern European Society (4)
Multiple reformations of the European Christian Church confronted with the rise of universities, colonial exploration, absolutism, scientific revolutions, and the Enlightenment. Focused attention will be given to early modern Europe (Muslims, Jews, and Protestant sects).

HIEU 106. Egypt, Greece, and Rome (4)
This course is a survey of the political, social, and cultural history of the ancient Mediterranean. It focuses on the ancient empires in the Near East (Sumer, Babylon, Assyria, Persia), Egypt, Greece, and Rome. +

HIEU 106GS. Constantinople: Imperial Capital (4)
This course examines Constantinople in its imperial period (Byzantine and Ottoman) when it served as the political, cultural, economic, and religious center of empire. We examine continuity and change in areas such as urban space, demography, institutions, and art and architecture. Students must apply and be accepted into the Global Seminar Program. +

HIEU 107/RELI 147. Pagan Europe and its Christian Aftermath (4)
This course explores the history of how Western Europe was converted from its indigenous pagan religions to the imported religion we know as Christianity. We will discuss conversion by choice and by force, partial or blended conversions, and the relationships between belief and culture. Students may not receive credit for both HIEU 107 and RELI 147. +

HIEU 108. Sex and Politics in the Ancient World (4)
A history of approaches to sexual practices, sexual identity, and sexual morality in the Roman Empire between the first and fifth centuries of the Common Era. We will examine how political, religious, and medical transformations during this period changed the ways in which people thought of issues like sexual freedom, same-sex relations, marriage and celibacy, sexual violence, and more. +

HIEU 109. Blood, Soil, Boundaries: Nationalism in Europe (4)
This course will explore the history of nationalism as idea and political movement in European history, from the French Revolution to the present. +

HIEU 111. Europe in the Middle Ages (4)
This course will cover the development of European society and culture from 1050 to 1400. +

HIEU 112S. Ancient Explorers (4)
Ancient travel into unexplored regions of the world and the discovery of new civilizations. Look at actual voyages, focusing on the remarkable figures who braved the unknown, the objects of their journeys, and their crude equipment and knowledge. +

HIEU 113. The History of the Russian Empire, 1775–1917 (4)
A survey course which takes as its starting point the final gathering of the Russian Empire under Catherine the Great and carries it through the peasant emancipation of 1861, through the rise of capitalism, and culminates in the abdication of the Romanov dynasty in February 1917. +

HIEU 114. The History of the Soviet Union and Russia, 1917 to the Present (4)
The Bolshevik revolution was supposed to change humanity. Led by Vladimir Lenin and perverted by Joseph Stalin, the USSR defeated Nazism in World War II and challenged the U.S. throughout the Cold War. It then collapsed, transitioning from a chaotic version of democracy and market economy to authoritarianism and controlled capitalism.

HIEU 114GS. Athens: A City in History (4)
This course examines how Athenians during different epochs have dealt and still deal with the realities of everyday life and death. The topics covered by the course include work, war, religion, politics, and death. Students must apply and be accepted into the Global Seminar Program. +

HIEU 115. The Pursuit of the Millennium (4)
The year 2000 provokes questions about the transformation of time, culture, and society. Taking the year 1000 as a touchstone, this class examines the history of apocalyptic expectations in the Middle Ages through a close scrutiny of both texts and art. +

HIEU 116A. Greece and the Balkans in the Age of Ottoman Expansion (4)
This course examines the history of Greece and the Balkans (1350–1683). Topics covered: the rise of the Ottoman Empire, conquest of the Balkans, the Ottoman system of rule, religious life, rural and urban society, law and order, and material culture. +

HIEU 116B. Greece and the Balkans in the Age of Nationalism (4)
This course examines the history of Greece and the Balkans (1683–1914). Topics covered: social and economic development in the eighteenth century, nationalism, independence wars, state-nation formation, interstate relations, the Eastern Question, rural society, urbanization, emigration, and the Balkan Wars. Students may not get credit for both HIEU 116B and HIEU 117A.

HIEU 116C. Greece and the Balkans during the Twentieth Century (4)
This course examines the history of Greece and the Balkans (1914–2001). Topics covered: World War I, population exchanges, authoritarianism, modernization, World War II, civil wars, Cold War, Greek-Turkish relations, Cyprus, collapse of communism, 1990s conflicts, and EU expansion. Students may not get credit for both HIEU 116C and HIEU 116CD.

HIEU 116CD. Greece and the Balkans during the Twentieth Century (4)
This course examines the history of Greece and the Balkans (1914–2001). Topics covered: World War I, population exchanges, authoritarianism, modernization, World War II, civil wars, Cold War, Greek-Turkish relations, Cyprus, collapse of communism, 1990s conflicts, and EU expansion. Students may not get credit for both HIEU 116C and HIEU 116CD or HIEU 116CD or HIEU 117B.

HIEU 117A. Greece and the Balkans in the Age of Nationalism (4)
This course examines the history of Greece and the Balkans (1683–1914). Topics covered: social and economic development in the eighteenth century, nationalism, independence wars, state-nation formation, interstate relations, the Eastern Question, rural society, urbanization, emigration, and the Balkan Wars.

HIEU 117B. Greece and the Balkans during the Twentieth Century (4)
This course examines the history of Greece and the Balkans (1914–2001). Topics covered: World War I, population exchanges, authoritarianism, modernization, World War II, resistance, civil wars, Cold War, Greek-Turkish relations, Cyprus, collapse of communism, 1990s conflicts, and EU expansion.

HIEU 118. Americanization in Europe (4)
Examines problems surrounding the transfer of American culture, values, and styles to Europe in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. Topics may include consumer society, popular culture, commercial and business practices, “McDonaldization,” political and military influence, democratization, and resistance to Americanization. Students may not receive credit for both HIEU 117S and HIEU 118.

HIEU 119. Death and Afterlife in the Middle Ages (4)
This class investigates the ways in which medieval people understood death as well as the various ways in which they imagined the afterlife. We will discuss the cult of martyrs and saints; encounters with ghosts and revenants; the formation of the doctrine of purgatory; visionary journeys to the other world; and early medical discourses defining the death of the body. +

HIEU 120. The Renaissance in Italy (4)
The social, political, and cultural transformation of late-medieval Italy from the heyday of mercantile expansion before the plague to the dissolution of the Italian state system with the French invasions of 1494. Special focus upon family, associational life and factionalism in the city, the development of the techniques of capitalist accumulation, and the spread of humanism. +

HIEU 121GS. Scotland and the English Civil War, 1601–1689 (4)
A lecture-discussion course that examines the role of Scotland in the English Civil War during the first half of the seventeenth century, 1601–1689. +

HIEU 122. Ancient Greece in the Archaic Period (4)
History of the Greek world from Minoans and Myceneans to the aftermath of the Persian Wars. It focuses on the rise of the polls, political developments in Athens and Sparta, and the confrontation with the Persian Empire. +

HIEU 123. Ancient Greece in the Classical Period (4)
This course explores the history of the Greek world from the rise of Athens and Sparta as major powers to the death of Alexander the Great. +

HIEU 123GS. Origins of Law and Religious Freedom in England and America, 1530–1971 (4)
A lecture-discussion course that examines the origins and evolution of religious freedom from the age of Tudors to the adoption of the Bill of Rights in the United States in 1791. Course materials fees may be required. Students must apply and be accepted into the Global Seminar Program.

HIEU 124. The Age of Alexander: Hellenistic History from Alexander the Great to Cleopatra
This course traces the social, cultural, and political developments of the multiethnic empire that emerged in the wake of Alexander the Great’s conquests, from the rise of Macedon in the 360s BCE to Cleopatra’s death in 30 BCE. +

HIEU 124GS. The City Italy (4)
Language and cultural study in Italy. Course considers the social, political, economic, and religious aspects of civic life that gave rise to the unique civic art, the architecture of public buildings, and the design of the urban environment of such cities as Florence, Venice, or Rome. Course materials fees may be required. Students may not receive credit for both HIEU 124 and HIEU 124GS. Students must apply and be accepted into the Global Seminar Program.

HIEU 125. Reformation Europe (4)
The intellectual and social history of the Reformation and Counter-Reformation from the French invasions to the Edict of Nantes. Emphasis is upon reform from below and above, the transformation of grassroots spirituality into institutional control. +

HIEU 128. Europe since 1945 (4)
An analysis of European history since the end of the Second World War. Focus is on political, social, economic, and cultural developments within European societies as well as on Europe’s relationship with the wider world (the Cold War, decolonization).

HIEU 129. Paris, Past and Present (4)
This course surveys the historical and cultural significance of Paris from about 1500 to the present. The focus is on interactions between political, architectural, and urban evolutions, and the changing populations of Paris in times of war, revolutions, and peace. +

HIEU 130. Europe in the Eighteenth Century (4)
A lecture-discussion course focusing on Europe from 1688 to 1789. Emphasis is on the social, cultural, and intellectual history of France, Germany, and England. Topics considered will include family life, urban and rural production and unrest, the poor, absolutism, and the Enlightenment from Voltaire to Rousseau. +

HIEU 131. The French Revolution: 1789–1814 (4)
This course examines the Revolution in France and its impact in Europe and the Caribbean. Special emphasis will be given to the origins of the Revolution, the development of political and popular radicalism and symbolism from 1789 to 1794, the role of political participants (e.g., women, sans-culottes, Robespierre), and the legacy of revolutionary wars and the Napoleonic system on Europe. +

HIEU 132. The Spanish Civil War (4)
This course will examine the Spanish Civil War (1936–1939), from its long- and short-term causes, to the military conflict, the war’s internationalization, the violence perpetrated against civilians, the ideological stakes, the struggles of everyday life for the population, and the divided memory of the war that still inflames passions today. The course will view the war both through a Spanish lens and as a case study of broader trends including modern civil wars and the interwar European crisis.

HIEU 134. The Formation of the Russian Empire, 800–1855 (4)
State-building and imperial expansion among the peoples of the East Slavic lands of Europe and Asia from the origins of the Russian state in ninth-century Kiev, through Peter the Great’s empire up to the middle of the nineteenth century. +

HIEU 135. Sun, Sea, Sand, and Sex: Tourism and Tourists in the Contemporary World (4)
Major developments in modern tourism history, focusing on post-1945 Europe in its broader global context. Topics include tourism’s relationship to cultural change and transfers, globalization, international politics, business, economics, wealth distribution, the environment, sexuality and sex tourism, and national identity.

HIEU 135GS. Sun, Sea, Sand, and Sex: Tourism and Tourists in the Contemporary World (4)
Major developments in modern tourism history, focusing on post-1945 Europe in its broader global context. Topics include tourism’s relationship to cultural change and transfers, globalization, international politics, business, economics, wealth distribution, the environment, sexuality and sex tourism, and national identity. Program or materials fees may apply. Students may not receive credit for HIEU 135 and HIEU 135GS. Students must apply and be accepted to the Global Seminars Program.

HIEU 136B. European Society and Social Thought, 1870–1989 (4)
A lecture and discussion course on European political and cultural development and theory from 1870–1989. Important writings will be considered both as responses to and as provocations for political and cultural change.

HIEU 137. History of Colonialism: From New Imperialism to Decolonization (4)
This course surveys the age of colonialism in the nineteenth and twentieth century. The course will focus on the debates on colonialism in the metropolis as well as on the conflicts inside the colonies. Considerable emphasis will be placed on colonialism in Africa.

HIEU 139. Sex and Gender from the Renaissance to the French Revolution (4)
This course places gender and sexuality at the center of European history from the Renaissance to the French Revolution. We examine the distinct roles that men and women played in the period’s major events. We track how practices and understandings of gender and sexuality shifted during the four centuries between 1500 and 1800. +

HIEU 140. History of Women and Gender in Europe: From the French Revolution to the Present (4)
This course explores the diverse history of women from the French Revolution to the present, with an emphasis on the variety of women’s experience, the formation of gender identities, and the shifting relationship between gender and power over the course of the modern period. Topics include women and citizenship, science and gender, feminist movements, and the evolution of women’s work.

HIEU 140GS. Art and Society in Nineteenth-Century London (4)
This course examines English responses to the French Revolution, industrialization, and engagement with other cultures during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Readings from high, popular, and folk literature, both serious and satirical, illuminate life in the London metropolis. Program or materials fees may apply. Students must apply and be accepted to the Global Seminars Program.

HIEU 141. European Diplomatic History, 1870–1945 (4)
European imperialism, alliances, and the outbreak of the First World War. The postwar settlement and its breakdown. The advent of Hitler and the disarray of the western democracies. The Second World War and the emergence of the superpowers.

HIEU 142. European Intellectual History, 1780–1870 (4)
European thought from the late Enlightenment and the French Revolution to Marx and Baudelaire, emphasizing the origins of romanticism, idealism, and positivism in England, Germany, and France.

HIEU 143. European Intellectual History, 1870–1945 (4)
A lecture-discussion course on the crisis of bourgeois culture, the redefinition of Marxist ideology, and the transformation of modern social theory. Readings will include Nietzsche, Sorel, Weber, Freud, and Musil. (This course satisfies the minor in the Humanities Program.)

HIEU 144. Topics in European History (4)
Selected topics in European history. Course may be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

HIEU 145. The Holocaust as Public History (4)
We will study historical accounts, memoirs, diaries, and oral histories to master the Holocaust epoch. We will contrast scholarly narratives to personal experience as different ways to learn about the past. Students will design projects for public education.

HIEU 146. Fascism, Communism, and the Crisis of Liberal Democracy: Europe 1919–1945 (4)
A consideration of the political, social, and cultural crisis that faced Western liberal democracies in the interwar period, with emphasis on the mass movements that opposed bourgeois liberalism from both the left and the right.

HIEU 146S. The Meaning of Life in the Modern World: Existentialism, Fascism, and Genocide (4)
Examines existentialism as a way of thinking from the late nineteenth to mid-twentieth century. Explores the historical context of existentialism in Germany and France, e.g., World War II, the Holocaust, fascism, and communism. Selections from Heidegger, Sartre, Camus, and de Beauvoir.

HIEU 147. Europe and the World I, 1808–1918 (4)
A survey of Europe’s relationship to the world from the end of the Atlantic slave trade to the end of the first world war. Topics include Europe and slavery, colonialism, the global origins of the industrial revolution, explorers and knowledge transfer, nation-building and the American civil war, transnational social movements (abolitionism, feminism, socialism), global modernism, international trade, imperialism abroad and at home, colonial wars and genocides, World War I as a global conflict.

HIEU 148. Europe and the World II, 1918–Present (4)
A survey of Europe’s relationship to the world from the end of World War I to the present. Topics include deglobalization, imperialism, and anti-imperialism; world economic crisis; global fascism; World War II as a global conflict; decolonization and neo-colonialism; the Cold War; racism and immigration; transnational social movements; popular culture and sports; human rights and global memory; the rise and the fall of communism; capitalism and environmentalism; the crisis of liberal democracy.

HIEU 149. Land of Three Faiths: Jews, Muslims, and Christians in Medieval Spain and Portugal (4)
History of Spain from the arrival of Islam in 711 CE to the Christian conquest of Granada in 1492. The term “medieval Spain” evokes popular stereotypes, including that of a dark period of Islamic “occupation” of Christian territory, and its counterpart, tolerant society of Jews, Muslims, and Christians that might serve as a model for today’s world. Students will study the complexity of life in medieval Spain, discerning nuances more interesting and surprising than either of these stereotypes. +

HIEU 150. Modern British History (4)
This course focuses on changes in social structure and corresponding shifts in political power, the expansion and the end of empire, and two World Wars and the erosion of economic leadership.

HIEU 151. Spain since 1808 (4)
Social, political, cultural history of Spain since Napoleon. Features second Spanish Republic, the Civil War, Franco era, and transition to democracy.

HIEU 151GS. History of Modern Spain, 1808–Present (4)
Social, political, cultural history of Spain since Napoleon. Features second Spanish Republic, the Civil War, Franco era, and transition to democracy. It will also include excursions to various sites of historical significance in and around Madrid. Program or materials fees may apply. Students may not receive credit for HIEU 151 and HIEU 151GS. Students must apply and be accepted to the Global Seminars Program.

HIEU 152. The Worst of Times: Everyday Life in Authoritarian and Dictatorial Societies (4)
Examines how ordinary citizens coped with the problems of life under Europe’s authoritarian regimes. Topics may include Nazism, fascism, and quasi-fascist societies (e.g., Franco’s Spain, Salazar’s Portugal), and communist practice from Leninism to Stalinism to the milder Titoism of Yugoslavia.

HIEU 153. Topics in Modern European History (4)
Selected topics in modern European history. Course may be taken for credit up to three times as topic vary.

HIEU 154. Modern German History: From Bismarck to Hitler (4)
An analysis of the volatile course of German history from unification to the collapse of the Nazi dictatorship. Focus is on domestic developments inside Germany as well as on their impact on European and global politics in the twentieth century.

HIEU 154GS. Modern Germany: From Bismarck to Hitler (4)
An analysis of the volatile course of German history from unification to the collapse of the Nazi dictatorship. Focus is on domestic developments inside Germany as well as on their impact on European and global politics in the twentieth century. Students may not receive credit for both HIEU 154 and HIEU 154GS. Program or materials fees may apply. Students must apply and be accepted to the Global Seminars Program.

HIEU 154XL. HIEU 154 Foreign Language Section (4)
Students will exercise advanced German language skills to read and discuss materials in HIEU 154. Must be enrolled in HIEU 154.

HIEU 158. Why Hitler? How Auschwitz? (4)
Why did Germany in 1919 produce an Adolf Hitler; how did the Nazis take power in 1933; and why did the Third Reich last until 1945? Why did the war against the Jews become industrial and absolute?

HIEU 159. Three Centuries of Zionism, 1648–1948 (4)
For centuries, the land of Israel was present in Jewish minds and hearts. Why and how did the return to Zion become a reality? Which were the vicissitudes of Jewish life in Palestine?

HIEU 159S. Three Centuries of Zionism 1648–1948 (4)
For centuries, the land of Israel was present in Jewish minds and hearts. Why and how did the return to Zion become a reality? Which were the vicissitudes of Jewish life in Palestine?

HIEU 160. Topics in Ancient Greek History (4)
Selected topics in ancient Greek history. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and department approval required. +

HIEU 161/261. Topics in Roman History (4)
Selected topics in Roman history. May be taken for credit three times as topics will vary. Prerequisites: upper-division and department stamp. +

HIEU 162/262. Topics in Byzantine History (4)
Selected topics in Byzantine history. May be taken for credit three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: upper-division and department stamp.

HIEU 163/263. Special Topics in Medieval History (4)
Intensive study of special problems or periods in the history of medieval Europe. Topics vary from year to year, and students may therefore repeat the course for credit. Prerequisites: background in European history and upper-division standing. +

HIEU 164/264. Special Topics in Early Modern Europe (4)
This course looks at the European and non-European in the early modern era. Topics will vary year to year. May be taken for credit three times.

HIEU 166/HIEU 266. Living on the Edge: Mediterranean Environmental History (4)
What defines a “Mediterranean climate”? Plentiful sunshine, hot, dry summers, and cool, wet winters? In fact, within the Mediterranean, there are countless microclimates. Some produce conditions of plenty, while others are precarious for human habitation. This colloquium examines the environmental history of the premodern Mediterranean focusing on the intersection between climate and human societies, particularly how humans respond to climate shifts in precariously arid zones. +

HIEU 167/267. Special Topics in the Social History of Early Modern Europe (4)
Topics will vary and may include political, socioeconomic, and cultural developments in the era from 1650 to 1850. Some years the emphasis will be on the theory and practice of revolutions and their impact on Europe and the world. Graduate students will be required to submit an additional piece of work.

HIEU 171/271. Special Topics in Twentieth-Century Europe (4)
This course alternates with HIEU 170. Topics will vary from year to year. Prerequisites: background in European history.

HIEU 172/272. Comparative European Fascism (4)
This course will be a comparative and thematic examination of the fascist movement and regimes in Europe from the 1920s to the 1940s. In particular, it will focus on the emergence of the two major fascist movements in Italy and Germany. Graduate students will be required to submit a more substantial piece of work with in-depth analysis and with an increased number of sources cited. A typical undergraduate paper would be ten pages, whereas a typical graduate paper would require engagement with primary sources, more extensive reading of secondary material, and be about twenty pages. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.

HIEU 174/274. The Holocaust: A Psychological Approach (4)
An examination of how traditional moral concerns and human compassion came to be abandoned and how the mass murder of the Jews was organized and carried out. The focus of this course will be on the perpetrators. Requirements will vary for undergraduate MA and PhD students. Graduate students are required to submit a more substantial piece of work. Prerequisites: upper-division or consent of instructor. Department stamp required.

HIEU 176/276. Politics in the Jewish Past (4)
This seminar addresses Jewish civic autonomy in the late medieval era, the terms of emancipation in the European states, the politics of Jewish socialists, the costs of assimilation, and the consequences of a successful Zionist state in 1948. Graduate students will be required to submit a more substantial piece of work with in-depth analysis and with an increased number of sources cited. A typical undergraduate paper would be ten pages, whereas a typical graduate paper would require engagement with primary sources, more extensive reading of secondary material, and be about twenty pages. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.

HIEU 178/278. Soviet History (4)
Topics will vary from year to year. Graduate students are required to submit a more substantial paper. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

HIEU 181/281. Immigration, Ethnicity, and Identity in Contemporary European Society (4)
Comparative study of immigration and migration in Europe since 1945. Topics include (im)migrant adaptation, assimilation, and identity; labor systems, opposition to and regulation of migration; competing concepts of nationality and citizenship, conflicts over Muslim immigration; and implications for European integration. Students may not receive credit for both HIEU 181/281 and ERC 101. Graduate students will be expected to submit an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.

HIEU 182/282. The Muslim Experience in Contemporary European Society (4)
Comparative study of Islam in Europe since 1945. Topics include indigenous populations; immigration; Islamic law/church-state questions; EU expansion/integration; gender issues; terrorism; Islamophobia; “Europeanizing” Islam; the historical tradition of European-Muslim encounter and its present political/cultural issues. Graduate students will be required to do an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.

HIEU 183/283. Social History and Anthropology of the Mediterranean (4)
This seminar examines the social history and anthropology of the Mediterranean. Topics covered are the Mediterranean debate, rural economy, peasant society, gender relations, honor and shame, rural violence, class formation, and emigration. The seminar introduces the methodology of historical anthropology. Graduate students will be expected to complete an additional paper or project. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.

HIEU 184/284. Yugoslavia: Before, During, and After (4)
Examines the multiethnic Yugoslav states that existed from 1918 until the 1990s. Topics include interethnic relations, foreign affairs, Tito’s revisionist communism, the consumerist Yugoslav Dream, culture and society, the violent break-up of the 1990s, and the post-Yugoslav order. Graduate students will be required to submit an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.

HIEU 198. Directed Group Study (1, 2, 3, 4)
Directed group study on European history under the supervision of a member of the faculty on a topic not generally included in the regular curriculum. Students must make arrangements with individual faculty members. Prerequisites: upper-division standing, completion of at least ninety units of UC San Diego undergraduate study, a minimum UC San Diego GPA of 2.95, a completed and approved Special Studies form, and department stamp.

HIEU 199. Independent Study in European History (4)
Directed readings for undergraduates under the supervision of various faculty members. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

HIGL 101. Jews, Christians, and Muslims (4)
The course will explore the cultural, religious, and social relationships between the three major religious groups in the medieval Mediterranean: Muslims, Christians, and Jews from the sixth through sixteenth centuries AD. Renumbered from HITO 101. Students may not receive credit for HIGL 101 and HITO 101.

HIGL 104. The Jews and Judaism in the Ancient and Medieval Worlds (4)
The political and cultural history of the Jews through the early modern period. Life under ancient empires, Christianity and Islam. The post-biblical development of the Jewish religion and its eventual crystallization into the classical, rabbinic model. Renumbered from HITO 104. Students may not receive credit for HIGL 104 and HITO 104. +

HIGL 114. History of Modern Vietnam (4)
This course introduces students to the history of modern Vietnam, starting with the Tay Son rebellion in the late eighteenth century and ending with the economic reforms of the 1980s. Topics include the expansion and consolidation of the French colonial state, the rise of anticolonialism and nationalism, the development of Vietnamese communism, World War II, and the First and Second Indochina Wars. A special emphasis will be focused on the place of Vietnam within wider regional and global histories.

HIGL 127. Sport in the Modern World (4)
Sport in all of its social, cultural, political, and economic aspects. The starting point will be the emergence of modern sport in nineteenth-century Britain, but the focus will be global. Since the approach will be topical rather than chronological, students should already have a good knowledge of world history in the nineteenth- and twentieth-centuries.

HIGL 144. Topics in Global History (4)
Selected topics in global history organized around a period, theme, or concept in history. Course may be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary (the course subtitle will be different for each distinct topic). Students who repeat the same topic in HIGL 144 will have the duplicate credit removed from their academic record.

HILA 100. Conquest and Empire: The Americas (4)
Lecture-discussion survey of Latin America from the pre-Columbian era to 1825. It addresses such issues as the nature of indigenous cultures, the implanting of colonial institutions, native resistance and adaptations, late colonial growth and the onset of independence. Students may not receive credit for both HILA 100 and HILA 100D. +

HILA 100D. Latin America: Colonial Transformation (4)
Lecture-discussion survey of Latin America from the pre-Columbian era to 1825. It addresses such issues as the nature of indigenous cultures, the implanting of colonial institutions, native resistance and adaptation, late colonial growth, and the onset of independence.

HILA 101. Nation-State Formation, Ethnicity, and Violence in Latin America (4)
Survey of Latin America in the nineteenth century. It addresses such issues as the collapse of colonial practices in the society and economy as well as the creation of national governments, political instability, disparities among regions within particular countries, and of economies oriented toward the export of goods to Europe and the United States.

HILA 102. Latin America in the Twentieth Century (4)
This course surveys the history of the region by focusing on two interrelated phenomena—the absence of democracy in most nations and the region’s economic dependence on more advanced countries, especially the United States. Among the topics discussed will be the Mexican Revolution, the military in politics, labor movements, the wars in Central America, liberation theology, and the current debt crisis.

HILA 102D. Latin America in the Twentieth Century (4)
This course surveys the history of the region by focusing on two interrelated phenomena—the absence of democracy in most nations and the region’s economic dependence on more advanced countries, especially the United States. Among the topics discussed will be the Mexican Revolution, the military in politics, labor movements, the wars in Central America, liberation theology, and the current debt crisis.

HILA 103. Revolution in Modern Latin America (4)
A political, economic, and social examination of the causes and consequences of the Mexican, Cuban, and Nicaraguan revolutions. Also examine guerrilla movements that failed to gain power in their respective countries, namely the Shining Path in Peru, FARC in Colombia, and the Zapatistas in Mexico.

HILA 104. Drugs in Latin America (4)
This course examines drugs in Latin America from the 1900s to the present. Brazil, Central America, Columbia, Mexico, and Peru are studied along with some short articles in other nations. We’ll also explore aspects of US intervention regarding drugs during and after the Cold War.

HILA 114. Dictatorships in Latin America (4)
How did dictatorships come about? Who were the authoritarian leaders? How did they organize their regimes and what were the consequences? Recent publications on dictators in Latin America allow for comparisons across countries and throughout time to answer these questions.

HILA 114D. Dictatorship in Latin America (4)
How did dictatorships come about? Who were the authoritarian leaders? How did they organize their regimes and what were the consequences? Recent publications on dictators in Latin America allow for comparisons across countries and throughout time to answer these questions.

HILA 117. Indians, Blacks, and Whites: Family Relations in Latin America (4)
The development of family structures and relations among different ethnic groups. State and economy define and are defined by family relations. Thus, this family approach also provides an understanding to broader socioeconomic processes and cultural issues.

HILA 118. Subverting Sovereignty: US Aggression in Latin America, 1898–Present (4)
This course will focus on several instances of US aggression in Latin America since 1898, covering military invasions, covert actions, and economic forms of coercion. Specific case studies will include events in Mexico in 1914, Cuba in 1933 and 1959–1962, Guatemala in 1954, and Chile in 1973.

HILA 119. Central America: Popular Struggle, Political Change, and US Intervention
Covers the divisive history of Central America from the building of the Panama Canal and the Sandinista Revolution to the 2009 coup in Honduras and the recent migration to the U.S. Explores the ideas and practices of popular politics—including revolutionary socialism—along with questions of indigeneity and racism, capitalism, gender, and US intervention.

HILA 121A. History of Brazil through 1889 (4)
This course covers many of the most transformative and fascinating social, political, and racial phenomena in Brazilian society through 1889, including indigenous life, Portuguese colonization, slavery and abolition, royal exile, independence and Empire, the birth of the Republic, war, social unrest, and ideals of modernization. +

HILA 121B. History of Brazil, 1889 to Present (4)
This course examines factors that shed light on Brazil’s label as a rising nation. In part, we will cover Brazil’s two dictatorships, labor struggles, racial issues, immigration from Asia and Europe, environmental concerns, and emergence as economic and political powerhouse.

HILA 122. Cuba: From Colony to Socialist Republic (4)
A lecture-discussion course on the historical roots of revolutionary Cuba, with special emphasis on the impact of the United States on the island’s development and society.

HILA 123. The Incas and Their Ancestors (4)
The Incas called their realm Tahuantinsuyu (Land of the Four Quarters). But the Incas were only one of the many ethnic groups in the Andean region. Many different other groups became a part of the Tahuantinsuyu in the wake of Inca expansion. Over the past decade, new and fascinating information on these processes have been published and allow for a rereading of Inca history between 900 and 1535. +

HILA 124. The History of Chile 1880–Present (4)
The course surveys Chile’s basic developments beginning with the era of nitrate exports. Students will have the opportunity to address a specific issue of his or her own choosing and develop the topic for class presentation and a final paper. The course will cover politics, cultural changes, class struggles, Allende’s revolutionary movement, and Pinochet’s dictatorship to the present.

HILA 124A. History of Women and Gender in Latin America (4)
A broad historical overview of Latin American women’s history focusing on issues of gender, sexuality, and the family as they relate to women, as well as the historiographical issues in Latin American and Chicana women’s history.

HILA 126. From Columbus to Castro: Caribbean Culture and Society (4)
Exploration of the relationships between socioeconomic and cultural development in Caribbean history; slavery and empire; nationalism and migration; vodun and Rastafarianism, and the literary arts.

HILA 131. A History of Mexico (4)
A century of Mexican history, 1821–1924: the quest for political unity and economic solvency, the forging of a nationality, the Gilded Age and aftermath, the ambivalent Revolution of Zapata and his enemies.

HILA 132. Modern Mexico: From Revolution to Drug War Violence (4)
The social and political history of twentieth-century Mexico from the outbreak of revolution to the current “war on drugs.” Highlights include the Zapatista calls for land reform, the muralist movement, and the betrayal of revolutionary ideals by a conservative elite. We will also study the Mexican urban experience and environmental degradation. Students may not receive credit for both HILA 132 and HILA 132GS.

HILA 132D. Modern Mexico: From Revolution to Drug War Violence (4)
The social and political history of twentieth-century Mexico from the outbreak of revolution to the current “war on drugs.” Highlights include the Zapatista calls for land reform, the muralist movement, and the betrayal of revolutionary ideals by a conservative elite. We will also study the Mexican urban experience and environmental degradation.

HILA 132GS. Modern Mexico: From Revolution to Drug War Violence (4)
The social and political history of twentieth-century Mexico from the outbreak of revolution to the current “war on drugs.” Highlights include the Zapatista calls for land reform, the muralist movement, and the betrayal of revolutionary ideals by a conservative elite. We will also study the Mexican urban experience and environmental degradation. Students may not receive credit for both HILA 132 and HILA 132GS. Program or materials fees may apply. Students must apply and be accepted to the Global Seminars Program.

HILA 133S. Guerrillas and Revolution in Latin America (4)
This course surveys guerrilla movements in Latin America from the Cuban Revolution through the Zapatista movement in Mexico, comparing and contrasting the origins, trajectories, and legacies of armed insurgencies, and focusing on the politics of defining “insurgents,” “revolutionaries,” and “terrorists.”

HILA 134. Indians of Colonial Latin America (4)
This course surveys the history of the native peoples of Mexico and the Andes from Iberian contact to the late colonial period (1492–1800). It focuses on changes and continuities in postconquest society, exploring topics such as gender, sexuality, and resistance.

HILA 135. Knowledge and Science in Colonial Latin America (4)
This course aims to introduce students to contemporary discussion about the history of science in colonial Latin America. Through careful inspection of maps, codices, printed texts, and other primary sources, the course will reflect on different forms of knowledge making and knowledge circulation. +

HILA 144. Topics in Latin American History (4)
Selected topics in Latin American history. Course may be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary (the course subtitle will be different for each distinct topic). Students who repeat the same topic in HILA 144 will have the duplicate credit removed from their academic record.

HILA 145. People and Nature in Amazonia: An Unwritten History (4)
Recordings of Amazonia’s past before Iberian adventurers searched for El Dorado are scarce. Environmental significance and the continued existence of large fluvial societies, read through the lenses of chroniclers, scientists, missionaries, and colonizers, allows a reconstruction of humankind’s relationship to nature.

HILA 161/261. History of Women in Latin America (4)
A broad historical overview of Latin American women’s history of focusing on the issues of gender, sexuality, and the family as they relate to women, as well as the historiographical issues in Latin American and Chicana women’s history.

HILA 162/262. Special Topics in Latin American History (4)
Topics will vary from year to year or quarter to quarter. May be repeated for an infinite number of times due to the nature of the content of the course always changing. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

HILA 163/263. The History of Chile 1880–Present (4)
The course surveys Chile’s basic developments beginning with the era of nitrate exports. Students will have the opportunity to address a specific issue of his/her own choosing and develop the topic for class presentation and a final paper. Graduate students are expected to submit a more substantial piece of work. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

HILA 164/264. Women’s Work and Family Life in Latin America (4)
Inside or outside the household, women have always worked. Where do we find Latin American women? How has the labor market changed? How was and is women’s work perceived? What were the consequences of changing work patterns on family life? Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

HILA 167/267. Scholarship on Latin American History in the Colonial Period (4)
Introduction to the historiography on Latin America for the colonial period from Spanish and Portuguese conquests to the Wars of Independence. Requirements will vary for undergraduate, MA, and PhD students. Graduate students are required to submit an additional research paper. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor; reading knowledge of Spanish; department stamp. +

HILA 168/268. Scholarship on Latin American History in the Nineteenth Century (4)
Introduction to the historiography on Latin America for the nineteenth century: world economy, nation-state building, agrarian processes, incipient industrialization, political and cultural thought, and social structure. Requirements will vary for undergraduate, MA, and PhD students. Graduate students are required to submit an additional research paper. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor; reading knowledge of Spanish; department stamp.

HILA 169/269. Scholarship on Latin American History in the Twentieth Century (4)
Introduction to the historiography on Latin America for the twentieth century: agrarian reforms, unionization, industrialization by import substitution, the political left, social development, and international relations. Requirements will vary for undergraduate, MA, and PhD students. Graduate students are required to submit an additional research paper. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor; reading knowledge of Spanish; department stamp.

HILA 171/271. Topics in Latin American History Since 1910 (4)
Topics may vary from year to year. May be repeated for credit. Requirements will vary for undergraduates, MA, and PhD students. Graduate students are required to submit a more substantial piece of work.

HILA 198. Directed Group Study (4)
Directed group study on a topic not generally included in the regular curriculum. Students must make arrangements with individual faculty members.

HILA 199. Independent Study in Latin American History (4)
Directed readings for undergraduates under the supervision of various faculty members. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and department stamp.

HINE 100. The Hebrew Bible and History (4)
The history and literature of ancient Israel c. 1300 to 300 BCE. Reading from the Bible, historical and archaeological surveys, and studies of authorship. +

HINE 108. The Middle East before Islam (4)
The peoples, politics, and cultures of Southwest Asia and Egypt from the sixth century BCE to the seventh century CE. The Achaemenid Empire, the Ptolemaic and Seleucid kingdoms, the Roman Orient, the Parthian and Sasanian states. +

HINE 109. History of the Middle East (1200–1800): The Ottoman Empire (4)
A survey of the history of the Middle East, in particular, the Ottoman Empire, from 1200–1800. The course examines the emergence of a new political and religious order following the Mongol conquests and its long-lasting effect on the region. +

HINE 113. Ancient Near East Mythology (4)
Course will analyze and compare major myths from Egypt, Israel, Ugarit, and Mesopotamia, employing a variety of modern approaches. +

HINE 114. History of the Islamic Middle East (4)
A survey of the Middle East from the rise of Islam to the region’s economic, political, and cultural integration into the West (mid-nineteenth century). Emphasis on socioeconomic and political change in the early Arab empires and the Ottoman state. +

HINE 115. Death and Dying in Antiquity (4)
Exploration of ideas, beliefs, and practices pertaining to death from a variety of ancient cultures: Near Eastern, Israelite, Greek, Roman, Jewish, and early Christian. Themes include immortality, afterlife, care for the dying, suicide, funerary rituals, martyrdom, and resurrection. +

HINE 116. The Ottoman Empire, Iran and Egypt (1798–1914) (4)
Examines the contacts of the late Ottoman Empire and Qajar Iran with Europe from the Napoleonic invasion of Egypt to World War I, the diverse facets of the relationship with the West, and the reshaping of the institutions of the Islamic states and societies.

HINE 118. The Middle East in the Twentieth Century (4)
An introduction to the history of the Middle East since 1914. Themes such as nationalism, imperialism, the oil revolution, and religious revivalism will be treated within a broad chronological and comparative framework drawing on the experience of selected countries.

HINE 119. US Mid-East Policy Post-WWII (4)
An examination of post-WWII Middle East conflicts, including the Israeli-Arab conflicts, the Lebanese Civil War, and the Gulf War of the 1980s. The roles of the superpowers and Middle Eastern states during the period.

HINE 120. The Middle East in the New Century (4)
An examination of the conflicts, changes, and continuities in the Middle East since 2000. The course includes inspection of the US role in Iraq and the region generally.

HINE 125. Jews in the Greek and Roman World (4)
A history of Jews and Judaism from 300 BCE to 500 CE, emphasizing cultural and religious exchanges and interactions of Jews with Greece and Rome. Among the topics covered in class: Hellenism and the emergence of Jewish identity; political resistance and cultural adaptation; the beginnings of Christianity and varieties of Jewish belief and practice in antiquity. +

HINE 126. Iranian Revolution in Historical Perspective (4)
Iran’s social and political history in the twentieth century with emphasis on the Constitutional movement of the late Qajar period, formation and development of the Pahlavi state, anatomy of the 1978–79 Revolution, and a survey of the Islamic Republic.

HINE 127. History of Modern Turkey (4)
Eastern problems on the example of Turkey and with special attention to collective identities, state-society dynamics, foreign and regional policies, and varieties of modernity.

HINE 128. History of the Middle East: The Early Medieval Period, 500–1000 (4)
This class covers the history of the Middle East and the larger Mediterranean world from 500 to 1000. It surveys the late antique world in the sixth century and the birth of Islam, the rise of the early Islamic empires stretching from Central Asia to Spain, and the creation of a larger Arabo-Islamic culture in the Abbasid Empire. +

HINE 129. History of the Middle East: The Late Medieval Period, 1000–1500 (4)
This class covers the history of the Middle East and the larger Mediterranean world from 1000 to 1500. The class discusses not only dynasties and kingdoms like that of Umayyad Spain, Mamluk Egypt, and Seljuk Iran, but also the impact of the Crusades, the Mongol conquests, and the growing frontier at the edges of the Islamic world. +

HINE 135GS. Introduction to Contemporary Israeli Society and Culture (4)
This course introduces the students to contemporary Israeli society. Among the topics explored: Israeli-Arab conflict; relations between European, Arab, Russian, and Ethiopian Jews; between secular and religious Jews; between Jews and Arabs; and between Israel and World Jewry.

HINE 136GS. Zionism and Post Zionism (4)
This course explores the evolution of Zionism from its late nineteenth-century origins to the present. Among the topics explored: political, cultural, spiritual and social varieties of Zionism; and the contending narratives about its nature, meaning, and accomplishments.

HINE 137. History of Two Peoples in Palestine/Israel (4)
A historical background to deepen an understanding of contemporary conflicts in the Middle East. The course surveys the history of Jewish and Palestinian peoples from 1881–present; contrasts the deep structures of the two societies; surveys political ideologies, charismatic leaders, and social movements; and evaluates the consequences of the British Mandate. At 1948 we juxtapose the new Jewish sovereignty with the movement of Palestinian Arabs away from the borders of the new state.

HINE 144. Topics in Middle Eastern History (4)
Selected topics in the history of the Middle East. May be taken for credit three times.

HINE 145. Islam and Science: The History of Science in the Middle East (600–1950) (4)
A survey of the history of science in the Middle East from 600 to the present day. The course examines the relationship between science, learning, and religion in Islamic societies and its connections to other regions of the globe. +

HINE 160/260. Special Topics in the Bible and Ancient Near East (4)
The study of a single book, period, or issue on the Bible, in the context of the ancient Near Eastern world. Requirements will vary for undergraduate, master’s, and doctoral students. Graduate students may be required to submit a more substantial piece of work. Prerequisites: department stamp required. +

HINE 162/262. Anthropology and the Hebrew Bible (4)
This course approaches the Hebrew Bible (Old Testament) from the perspective of cultural anthropology. Institutions studied will include the family, rites of passage, food taboos, warfare, animism, demons, sorcery, and animal sacrifice. Formerly HINE 111; students may not receive credit for HINE 111 and HINE 162/262. Graduate students will be required to complete an extra paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp. +

HINE 165/265. The Colonial Mandates in the Middle East (4)
A colloquium focusing on the problems and patterns in the emergence of modern Middle Eastern states since 1920. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.

HINE 166/266. Nationalism in the Middle East (4)
Growth of nationalism in relation to imperialism, religion, and revolution in the nineteenth- and twentieth-century Middle East. Emergence of cultural and political ethnic consciousness in the Ottoman state. Comparative study of Arab, Iranian, and Turkish nationalism as well as Zionism. Prerequisites: department stamp or consent of instructor.

HINE 170/270. Special Topics in Jewish History (4)
This course studies a period or theme in Jewish history. Topics will vary from year to year. Prerequisites: department stamp required.

HINE 171/271. Topics in Early Judaism and Christianity (4)
Selected topics in the history of Judaism and Christianity in the first through fourth centuries CE, with emphasis on the shared origins and mutual relations of the two religions. May be taken for credit up to two times. +

HINE 186/286. Special Topics in Middle Eastern History (4)
Focused study of historical roots of contemporary problems in the Middle East: Islamic modernism and Islamist movements; contacts with the West; ethnic and religious minorities; role of the military; economic resources and development. Department stamp and permission of instructor.

HINE 198. Directed Group Study (4)
Directed group study on a topic not generally included in the regular curriculum. Students must make arrangements with individual faculty members.

HINE 199. Independent Study in Near Eastern History (4)
Directed readings for undergraduates under the supervision of various faculty members. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

HISC 102. Technology in World History (4)
Technology as an agent of change. How have humans harnessed the power of nature? What factors have contributed to successes and failures? How has technology changed human life? How should we evaluate the quality of these changes?

HISC 103. Gender and Science in Historical Perspective (4)
History of women’s struggles and strategies for access and equality in professional science. Questions related to gender bias in science—as a social institution and as an epistemological enterprise—will be addressed in light of the historical and biographical readings.

HISC 104. History of Popular Science (4)
Historical aspects of the popularization of science. The changing relation between expert science and popular understanding. The reciprocal impact of scientific discoveries and theories, and popular conceptions of the natural world.

HISC 105. History of Environmentalism (4)
History of human effects on the natural environment, with emphasis on understanding the roles of the physical and biological sciences in providing insights into environmental processes.

HISC 106. The Scientific Revolution (4)
A cultural history of the formation of early modern science in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries: the social forms of scientific life; the construction and meaning of the new cosmologies from Copernicus to Newton; the science of politics and the politics of science; the origins of experimental practice; how Sir Isaac Newton restored law and order to the West. +

HISC 107. The Emergence of Modern Science (4)
The development of the modern conception of the sciences, and of the modern social and institutional structure of scientific activity, chiefly in Europe, during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.

HISC 108. Life Sciences in the Twentieth Century (4)
The history of twentieth-century life sciences, with an emphasis on the way in which model organisms such as fruit flies, guinea pigs, bacteriophage, and zebra fish shaped the quest to unlock the secrets of heredity, evolution, and development.

HISC 109. Invention of Tropical Disease (4)
Explores the origins of the idea of the “tropics” and “tropical disease” as a legacy of European conquest and colonization and introduces students to themes in the history of colonialism, tropical medicine, and global public health.

HISC 110. Historical Encounters of Science and Religion (4)
There was no such thing as a single, unchanging relationship between science and religion, and this is a course about it. Topics include the “Conflict Thesis,” natural theology, the Galileo Affair, Darwinism, the antievolution crusade, creationism, secularization, atheism, and psychoanalysis. +

HISC 111. The Atomic Bomb and the Atomic Age (4)
Development of nuclear science and weapons—1930s to present—including the discovery of radioactivity and fission, the Manhattan project, the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and end of WWII, the H-bomb, and legacies of nuclear proliferation, environmental damage, and radioactive waste.

HISC 115. History of Modern Medicine (4)
Explores the origin of clinical method, the hospital, internal surgery, and the medical laboratory, as well as the historical roots of debates over health-care reform, genetic determinism, and the medicalization of society.

HISC 116. History of Bioethics (4)
The story behind the postwar rise of bioethics—medical scandals breaking in the mass media, the development of novel technologies for saving and prolonging life, the emergence of new diseases, the unprecedented scope for manipulation opened up by biology.

HISC 117. History of the Neurosciences (4)
A survey of the history of the neurosciences from the seventeenth century to the present, exploring the political, philosophical, cultural, aesthetic and ethical aspects of research into the workings of the human brain.

HISC 118. History of Sexology (4)
Analyzes the history of sexology as a series of episodes in the science of human difference, from the European reception of the first translation of the Kama Sutra in 1883 to the search for the “gay gene” in the 1990s.

HISC 119. Biology and Society (4)
This course explores contemporary issues in biology, ethics, and society. We will start by examining early cases of biopolitics, like social Darwinism and eugenics, and proceed to more recent issues, such as genetic engineering, patenting life, and the pharmaceutical industry.

HISC 120A. Technology in America I (4)
The role of technology in American history through the Civil War. Indigenous and colonial development, transportation infrastructures, and industrialization are explored to understand the connections among technology, society, and culture. +

HISC 123. Exploring the Skies c. 1500–1800 (4)
This course will delve into the complex geopolitical aspects of stargazing in global contexts, from the late fifteenth century to the late nineteenth century. +

HISC 124. Visual Cultures in Early Modern Science (4)
This course studies the relationship between art and science in early modernity. We will study the technical and social processes of making astronomical, botanical, anatomical, and microscopic images. Students will work with physical and digital primary materials.

HISC 125. Early Modern Mapping (4)
This course explores the changing meaning and function of imaginary maps, world maps, regional and thematic maps in different places and spaces from c.1500–1800. The course focuses on cultural, social, political, and material processes underlying the production, reading, and consumption of maps. +

HISC 126. Science and Literature c. 1600–1900 (4)
This course focuses on reading cosmic journeys, satirical travel narratives, utopian writing, realistic novels, and other genres. This course explores the complex relationship between literature and science in a variety of settings from the seventeenth to the late nineteenth century.

HISC 131. Science, Technology, and Law (4)
Science and law are two of the most powerful establishments of modern Western culture. Science organizes our knowledge of the world; law directs our action in it. Will explore the historical roots of the interplay between them.

HISC 132. Israel—Start-up Nation (4)
Through scientific and technological innovation Israel came to be known as the “Start-up Nation.” This course will explore the reasons why scientific and technological innovation became fundamental to Israeli society and their social, cultural, and economic implications. Students may not receive credit for HISC 132 and HISC 132GS.

HISC 132GS. Israel—Start-up Nation (4)
Through scientific and technological innovation Israel came to be known as the “Start-up Nation.” This course will explore the reasons why scientific and technological innovation became fundamental to Israeli society and their social, cultural, and economic implications. Students may not receive credit for HISC 132GS and HISC 132. Program or materials fees may apply. Students must apply and be accepted into the Global Seminar Program.

HISC 133. History of Climate Change (4)
This course explores the scientific, technological, economic, political, and legal developments that have shaped our understanding, attitudes, and policies regarding climate change.

HISC 163/263. History, Science, and Politics of Climate Change (4)
The complex historical development of human understanding of global climate change, including key scientific work, and the cultural dimensions of proof and persuasion. Special emphasis on the differential political acceptance of the scientific evidence in the United States and the world. Graduate students are required to submit an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing. Department stamp required.

HISC 165. Topics in Twentieth-Century Science and Culture (4)
This seminar explores topics at the interface of science, technology, and culture, from the late nineteenth century to the present. Topics change yearly; may be repeated for credit with instructor’s permission. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

HISC 167/267. Gender and Science (4)
Why have women been traditionally excluded from science? How has this affected scientific knowledge? How have scientists constructed gendered representations not only of women, but also of science and nature? We will address these questions from perspectives including history, philosophy, and psychoanalytic theory. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

HISC 173/273. Seminar on Darwin and Darwinisms (4)
Examines evolutionary theory before Darwin, the development of the theory of natural selection, the ongoing challenge from Lamarckism, nineteenth-century social Darwinism, the emergence of the neo-Darwinist synthesis, and the recent controversies over evolutionary psychology and creationism. Graduate students are expected to submit an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.

HISC 174/274. History of Localization of Brain Function (4)
From the beginnings of brain anatomy in the 1660s to the current rage for functional magnetic resonance imaging studies, this class investigates philosophical, ethical, and cultural dimensions of the quest to localize psychological phenomena in the physical brain. Graduate students are required to submit an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.

HISC 175/275. The Historical Sciences in the Nineteenth Century (4)
A critical analysis of the host of “historical sciences” that developed over the course of the long nineteenth century, from archaeology and paleontology to psychoanalysis and craniotomy, including the science of history itself. Graduate students will be required to submit an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.

HISC 176. History of Medicine in East and Southeast Asia (4)
This course introduces students to new and classic works in the history of medicine in East and Southeast Asia. Topics will include epidemic disease and state vaccination campaigns; opium and drug control; mental illness and asylums; earthquakes and disaster technologies; colonialism and public health; venereal disease and prostitution. Special emphasis will be placed on the role of experts and institutions and forms of scientific exchange and collaboration across the region.

HISC 180/280. Science and Public Policy (4)
This course will explore the evolution of the institutions, ideologies, procedures, standards, and expertise that modern democratic societies have used in applying science to generate and legitimate public policy.

HISC 198. Directed Group Study (4)
Directed group study on a topic not generally included in the regular curriculum. Students must make arrangements with individual faculty members.

HISC 199. Independent Study in the History of Science (4)
Directed readings for undergraduates under the supervision of various faculty members. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

HITO 87. Special First-year Student Seminar (1)
A seminar intended for exposing undergraduate students, especially first-year students, to exciting research programs conducted by department faculty. Enrollment is limited. Topic will vary quarter by quarter.

HITO 88. History and Practice of Well-Being (1)
How do people attempt to align their actions with their core values? This one-credit course introduces the recent history and current practice of Buddhist-inspired and neuroscience-informed principles of mindfulness, positive psychology, and cognitive therapy.

HITO 99. Independent Study on History Topics (1, 2, 3, 4)
Independent study for undergraduates with lower-division standing under the supervision of a member of the faculty on a topic not generally included in the regular curriculum. Students must make arrangements with individual faculty members. Prerequisites: lower-division standing, completion of thirty units of UC San Diego undergraduate study, a minimum UC San Diego GPA of 3.0, and a completed and approved Special Studies form.

HITO 100. The Craft of History (4)
This course provides history majors with a foundational understanding of the study of history as an academic discipline and of the work of historians.

HITO 105. Jewish Modernity from 1648 to 1948 (4)
Topics include the political emancipation of the Jews of Europe; the emergence of Reform, Conservative, and Modern Orthodox Judaism; Hasidism; modern anti-Semitism; Jewish socialism; Zionism; the Holocaust; the American Jewish community; the State of Israel.

HITO 106. Love and Family in the Jewish Past (4)
This course explores Jewish women’s experiences from the seventeenth century to the present, covering Europe, the United States, and Israel. Examines work, marriage, motherhood, spirituality, education, community, and politics across three centuries and three continents. Prerequisites: MMW 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 21 or 22; or WCWP 10A or 10B; or CAT 1, 2, or 3; or DOC 1, 2 or 3; or HILD 2A, 2B, 2C, 7A, 7B, 7C, 10, 11, 12, or 14; or MCWP 40, 41, 50 or 125; or HUM 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5.

HITO 107. Holocaust Video Production (4)
Students will produce creative video projects by conducting interviews and drawing from relevant texts, lectures, archival resources, and other materials to expand and deepen their understanding of the Holocaust and help contribute to the body of work documenting this period in history.

HITO 115/115GS. The Global Cold War (4)
The Cold War is often understood as a superpower rivalry between the U.S. and the Soviet Union. Yet, the second half of the twentieth century witnessed civil wars, revolutions, decolonization movements, and state violence throughout the world that do not fit in this bipolar framework. Focusing on these other events, this course reexamines the Cold War in global and comparative perspective, with a particular focus on political developments in Asia, Africa, and Latin America.

HITO 115S. Myth, History, and Archaeology (4)
Sources for reconstructing ancient history present special challenges. Introduce and examine critically some basic myths and chronicles of the eastern Mediterranean and ancient Near East and assess the challenges to today’s historian in reconstructing these histories.

HITO 116. Car Wars: A Global History of the World since 1900 through Cars (4)
How did cars come to dominate the world? This course provides a survey of the world since 1900 to the near future through the history of cars and their impacts on politics, economics, society, and the environment.

HITO 117. World History 1200–1800 (4)
This course examines the interaction between sections of the globe after 1200. It emphasizes factors operating on a transcontinental scale (disease, climate, migration) and historical/cultural phenomena that bridge distance (religion, trade, urban systems). This is not narrative history, but a study of developments that operated on a global scale and constituted the first phase of globalization. +

HITO 119/HMNR 100/SOC 174. Human Rights l: Introduction to Human Rights and Global Justice (4)
Explores where human rights come from and what they mean by integrating them into a history of modern society, from the Conquest of the Americas and the origins of the Enlightenment, to the Holocaust and the contemporary human rights regime.

HITO 123. The Global History of Soccer (4)
The most popular sport in the world is soccer. The game’s growth and expansion was thoroughly enmeshed with the spread of modernity. It was a product of the industrial and political revolutions of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. It has been an engine of nationalism and gender formation. The link of this sport to politics will be a central theme.

HITO 126. A History of Childhood (4)
This course will examine the different ways that attitudes toward children have changed throughout history. By focusing on the way that the child was understood, we will examine the changing role of the family, the role of culture in human development, and the impact of industrialization and modern institutions on the child and childhood.

HITO 133. War and Society: The Second World War (4)
An examination of the Second World War in Europe, Asia, and the United States. Focus will be on the domestic impact of the war on the belligerent countries as well as on the experiences of ordinary soldiers and civilians.

HITO 133D. War and Society: The Second World War (4)
An examination of the Second World War in Europe, Asia, and the United States. Focus will be on the domestic impact of the war on the belligerent countries as well as on the experiences of ordinary soldiers and civilians.

HITO 134. International Law—War Crimes and Genocide (4)
Comparative study of genocide and war crimes, stressing European developments since 1900 with reference to cases elsewhere. Topics include historical precedents; evolving legal concepts; and enforcement mechanisms. Emphasis on the Holocaust, the USSR under Stalin, ex-Yugoslavia, and the Armenian genocide. Students may not receive credit for both HITO 134 and ERC 102.

HITO 136. Jews and African Americans: Slavery, Diaspora, Ghetto (4)
Explore contrasts and parallels between African Americans and Jews from the seventeenth century to the present. Investigate slavery, the Civil War, shared music, political movements, urban geography, and longings to return to a homeland in Africa or Palestine.

HITO 140. History of Emotions (4)
An examination of the history of emotions from the early modern period to the present with a focus on Europe and North America. Analysis of different approaches to emotions as well as of specific emotions (love, honor, shame, fear, guilt).

HITO 150GS. The Scottish Enlightenment and the Founding of the United States (4)
A lecture-discussion course on the philosophical, political, and economic ideas that shaped the Scottish Enlightenment in the eighteenth century, especially the ideas of David Hume, Adam Smith, and John Witherspoon, and their impact upon the American Revolution and the Constitution of the United States.

HITO 155. Race, Sport, and Inequality in the Twentieth Century (4)
This course tracks the worldwide interplay of sport and race. We begin with patterns of exclusion and participation on the part of African Americans, Latinos, and Native Americans. We then examine patterns of inequality across the globe.

HITO 156. Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion in the United States and Europe: Multiple Multiculturalisms (4)
Comparative study of American and European multicultural politics and policy, focusing on developments since 1945. Coverage includes policies aimed at members of the African American, Native American, Latino/Chicano/Hispanic, and Asian/Pacific Islander communities and comparable European groups. Students will not receive credit for both HITO 156 and HITO 156GS.

HITO 156GS. Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion in the United States and Europe: Multiple Multiculturalisms (4)
Comparative study of America and European multicultural politics and policy, focusing on developments since 1945. Coverage includes policies aimed at members of the African American, Native American, Latino/Chicano/Hispanic, and Asian/Pacific Islander communities and comparable European groups. Students must submit applications to the International Center, Programs Abroad Office, and be accepted into the Global Seminar Program. Program or materials fees may apply. Students will not receive credit for both HITO 156 and HITO 156GS.

HITO 160GS. Globalization and Diaspora (4)
A course on Hong Kong’s political, economic, and cultural transformation alongside its incorporation into the global capitalist economy, with a focus on transnational migrants laboring and living in diaspora. Topics include Opium Wars, world system, export-processing zones, and anti-globalization movements. Students must submit applications to the International Center, Programs Abroad Office, and be accepted into the Global Seminar Program. Program or materials fees may apply.

HITO 164/264. Jews and Other Ethnics in the American Past (4)
In this course we compare the Jewish experience to other religious minorities in American history. Topics include motives and rates of immigration, education and work patterns, religious experiences, women’s roles, family life, and representations in popular and high culture.

HITO 165/265. Topics—LGBT History (4)
Topics will examine lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer identities, communities, culture, and politics. May be repeated for credit two times, provided each course is a separate topic, for a maximum of twelve units. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and department stamp.

HITO 166/266. Death Penalty Global Perspectives since 1492 (4)
From early modern witches, rebels, and heretics to hypermodern gangsters, terrorists, and serial killers, applying capital punishment to foreign nationals and ethnic minorities has sustained a global conversation about the sanctity of human life and the meaning of citizenship in the Americas and Europe. Graduate students must complete an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.

HITO 167/267. Global History of Sports in the Cold War (4)
This course will examine what has been called the Cultural Cold Wars. Sports were the most visible form of popular culture during the era (1945–91). It will make use of reports and essays produced for an international, multiyear research project. It will combine written and visual sources. Matters of class, race, gender, and nationality will be discussed. May be coscheduled with HITO 267. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.

HITO 168/268. The U.S. and Germany from the 1890s to the 1960s: Transitional Relations and Competing Modernities (4)
The course analyzes mutual influences and exchanges between the United States and Germany from the late nineteenth to the mid-twentieth century. Topics include imperialism and racism, social thought and intellectual migration, economic relations, feminism, and youth cultures, war, and occupation. Graduate students must complete an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.

HITO 170. Making History Popular (4)
This undergraduate seminar serves to train students to produce marketable historical content for a public audience. Students will develop effective writing and oral presentation skills through exercises like planning, pitching, and writing op-eds, short magazine articles, and longer-form writing, as well as outlining and creating podcasts, videos, or virtual exhibitions. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.

HITO 172/272. War in the Twentieth Century: A Psychological Approach (4)
Reckoning by novelists, essayists, and biographers with the phenomenon of contemporary warfare as an unprecedented experience and an abiding threat. Graduate students are required to submit a more substantial piece of work. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.

HITO 178/278. A History of Seafaring in the Age of Sail (4)
Taught in conjunction with the San Diego Maritime Museum, this course investigates life at sea from the age of discovery to the advent of the steamship. We will investigate discovery, technology, piracy, fisheries, commerce, naval conflict, sea-board life, and seaport activity. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp. +

HITO 180/280. Housing in the Developing World (4)
The majority of the world’s citizens now live in cities; this course examines the evolution of housing architecture and finance in the twentieth-century context of rapid urbanization, dissolving empire, industrialization, and globalization. Graduate students will submit a more substantial piece of work with in-depth analysis and with an increased number of sources cited. A typical undergraduate paper would be ten pages, whereas a typical graduate paper would require engagement with primary sources, more extensive reading of secondary material, and be about twenty pages. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and consent of instructor.

HITO 192. Senior Seminar in History (1)
The Senior Seminar Program is designed to allow senior undergraduates to meet with faculty members in a small group setting to explore an intellectual topic in history (at the upper-division level). Topics will vary from quarter to quarter. Senior Seminars may be taken for credit up to four times, with a change in topic, and permission of the department. Enrollment is limited to twenty students, with preference given to seniors. Prerequisites: department stamp and/or consent of instructor.

HITO 193/POLI 194/COM GEN 194/USP 194. Research Seminar in Washington, DC (6)
Course attached to six-unit internship taken by student participating in the UCDC program. Involves weekly seminar meetings with faculty and teaching assistant and a substantial historical research paper. Prerequisites: department stamp required; participating in UCDC program.

HITO 194. History Honors (4)
A program of independent study providing candidates for history honors an opportunity to develop, in consultation with an adviser, a preliminary proposal for the honors essay. An IP grade will be awarded at the end of this quarter. A final grade will be given for both quarters at the end of HITO 195. Prerequisites: consent of instructor. Department stamp required.

HITO 195. The Honors Essay (4)
Independent study under the supervision of a faculty member leading to the preparation of an honors essay. A letter grade for both HITO 194 and 195 will be given at the completion of this quarter. Prerequisites: consent of instructor. Department stamp required.

HITO 196. Honors Seminar (4)
The nature and uses of history are explored through the study of the historian’s craft based on critical analysis of historical literature relating to selected topics of concern to all historians. Required of all candidates for history honors and open to other interested students with the instructor’s consent. Department stamp required.

HITO 198. Directed Group Study (1–4)
Directed group study on a topic not generally included in the regular curriculum. Students must make arrangements with individual faculty members. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: upper-division standing, completion of at least ninety units of UC San Diego undergraduate study, a minimum G.P.A. of 2.5, and a completed and approved Special Studies form.

HITO 199. Independent Study in Historical Topics (4)
Independent study on a topic not generally included in the regular curriculum. Students must make arrangements with individual faculty members. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

HIUS 102. Chicana and Chicano Movement (4)
This course provides a critical examination of the Chicana/o movement of the 1960s and 1970s. The course will focus on the social, economic, and political factors that contributed to the formation of the collective struggle known as El Movimiento. Topics engaged in this course are racism, education, political disenfranchisement, immigration, labor, sexism, art and poetry, Chicana feminism, anti-war efforts, economic justice, religion, and interracial relations.

HIUS 103/ETHN 103A. The United States and the Pacific World (4)
History of the United States in the Pacific, with an emphasis on Hawai’i, Guam, the Mariana Islands, and the Marshall Islands, from the nineteenth century to the present. Topics include colonialism and imperialism, cultural representations, indigenous knowledge and sovereignty, militarism, tourism, and environmentalism. Students will not receive credit for both HIUS 103 and ETHN 103A.

HIUS 104. The Revolutionary Atlantic (4)
The upheavals that transformed the early modern Atlantic emphasizing the United States, Caribbean, and Great Britain. Topics: struggles to define democracy, the reorganization of the Atlantic state system, the Enlightenment, and international responses to the American and French Revolutions. +

HIUS 105. Chicanas and Latinas: Twentieth-Century US History (4)
This course examines the historical experiences of Chicanas, Puertorriqueñas, and Centroamericanas in the U.S. in the twentieth century. It explores the social, economic, and political conditions of everyday Chicanas and Latinas and the agency they exerted navigating and negotiating these realities. Topics include immigration, migration, community formation, gender and sexuality, labor organizing, grassroots activism, social movements, feminism, and criminalization and incarceration.

HIUS 106. Women of Color and Social Movements (4)
This course examines Chicana, Latina, African American, and Native American women’s leadership, influence, and participation within social movements in the U.S. Special emphasis will be placed on women of color feminist consciousness and their involvement in the civil rights; Black, Red, and Brown power movements; welfare rights and economic justice; and reproductive justice struggles such as battles against forced sterilization.

HIUS 106A. American Foreign Relations, to 1900 (4)
Course examines range of public and private interactions between the United States and the world, from the founding of the republic to the Spanish-American War. Topics include origins of federal foreign policy making power, territorial and commercial and ideological expansionism.

HIUS 106B. American Foreign Relations, since 1900 (4)
Examines foreign relations of the United States from acquisition of a formal overseas empire in the aftermath of the Spanish-American War to the end of the Cold War. Topics cover a range of public and private interactions with the world.

HIUS 106S. Apocalyptic Judaism (4)
Examine the development of apocalyptic Jewish movements in the Second Temple period and the influence these movements had on Rabbinic Judaism and early Christianity.

HIUS 108A. History of Native Americans in the United States I (4)
This course examines the history of the Native Americans in the United States with emphasis on the lifeways, mores, warfare, cultural adaptation, and relations with the European colonial powers and the emerging United States until 1870. +

HIUS 108B. History of Native Americans in the United States II (4)
This course examines the history of the Native Americans in the United States with emphasis on the lifeways, mores, warfare, cultural adaptation, and relations with the United States from 1870 to the present.

HIUS 110. America and the World: Revolution to World War I (4)
A lecture course that explores the evolution of the interaction between the United States and the world from the American Revolution to the First World War, with particular emphasis upon the role of diplomacy, war, and economic change.

HIUS 111. America and the World: World War I to the Present (4)
A lecture course that explores the evolution of the interaction between the United States and the world from 1914 to the present, with special attention to the era of the Great Depression, the Cold War, Vietnam, and the post 9/11 war on terror.

HIUS 112. The US Civil War (4)
The course addresses the causes, course, and consequences of the US Civil War. We will explore such themes as how Unionists and Confederates mobilized their populations and dealt with dissension, the war’s effects on gender and race relations, and the transformation of the federal government.

HIUS 113/ETHN 154. History of Mexican America (4)
This course explores the history of the largest minority population in the United States, focusing on the legacies of the Mexican War, the history of Mexican immigration and US-Mexican relations, and the struggle for citizenship and civil rights.

HIUS 114A. California History 1542–1850 (4)
This course surveys the history of California from the period just before Spanish contact in 1542 through California’s admission to the Union in 1850. +

HIUS 114B. California History, 1850–Present (4)
This course surveys the history of California from 1850 to the present.

HIUS 115. History of Sexuality in the United States (4)
Constructions of sex and sexuality in the United States from the time of precontact Native America to the present, focusing on sexual behaviors, sexual ideologies, and the uses of sexuality for social control.

HIUS 117/USP 168. History of Los Angeles (4)
This course examines the history of Los Angeles from the early nineteenth century to the present. Particular issues to be addressed include urbanization, ethnicity, politics, technological change, and cultural diversification.

HIUS 118. How Jews Became American (4)
This course explores the history of Jews in America from the colonial period to the present, focusing on both the development of Jewish communities primarily as a result of immigration and evolving relations between Jews and the larger American society.

HIUS 119. Colonialism and Militarism in Hawaii (4)
Examines the history of Hawaii’s colonial present, beginning with incorporation into Euro-American imagining of the Pacific world. The course focuses on how colonialism took root in the nineteenth century and how it manifests in contemporary Hawaii through the military and tourist industries. Of particular emphasis are historical and contemporary struggles to demilitarize and decolonize Hawaii and to reclaim native Hawaiian sovereignty.

HIUS 119GS. Colonialism and Militarism in Hawaii (4)
Examines the history of Hawaii’s colonial present, beginning with incorporation into Euro-American imagining of the Pacific world. The course focuses on how colonialism took root in the nineteenth century and how it manifests in contemporary Hawaii through the military and tourist industries. Of particular emphasis are historical and contemporary struggles to demilitarize and decolonize Hawaii and to reclaim native Hawaiian sovereignty. Students may not receive credit for HIUS 119 and HIEU 119GS. Students must apply and be accepted to the Global Seminars Program.

HIUS 120. Peace Movements in America (4)
Topics will include Quaker origins of the American peace movements and examples of opposition to wars in the twentieth century from World Wars I and II, Vietnam, antinuclear movements, and intervention in Central America to Iraq.

HIUS 120D/ETHN 120D. Race and Oral History in San Diego (4)
This course examines the history of racial and ethnic communities in San Diego. Drawing from historical research and interdisciplinary scholarship, we will explore how race impacted the history and development of San Diego and how “ordinary” folk made sense of their racial identity and experiences. Toward these ends, students will conduct oral history and community-based research, develop public and digital humanities skills, and preserve a collection of oral histories for future scholarship. Concurrent enrollment in an Academic Internship Program course strongly recommended. Students may not receive credit for HIUS 120D and ETHN 120D.

HIUS 122. History and Hollywood: America and the Movies since the Great Depression (4)
A lecture-discussion course utilizing written texts and films to explore major themes in American politics and culture from the Great Depression through the 1990s. Topics will include the wars of America, McCarthyism, the counterculture of the 1960s, and the transformation of race and gender relations.

HIUS 123/USP 167. History of New York City (4)
New York City breathes history. Whether it is in the music, the literature, or the architecture, the city informs our most basic conceptions of American identity. This course examines the evolution of Gotham from the colonial era to today.

HIUS 125/ETHN 163J. Asian American Social Movements (4)
History of Asian American activism from the late-nineteenth century to the present, with an emphasis on interethnic, interracial, and transnational solidarity practices. Topics include struggles for civil rights and labor rights; immigration reform; antiwar and anticolonial movements; hate crimes; and police brutality. Students may receive credit for one of the following: HIUS 125, HIUS 125GS, or ETHN 163J.

HIUS 125GS. Asian American Social Movements (4)
History of Asian American activism from the late-nineteenth century to the present, with an emphasis on interethnic, interracial, and transnational solidarity practices. Topics include struggles for civil rights and labor rights; immigration reform; antiwar and anticolonial movements; hate crimes; and police brutality. Students must apply and be accepted into the Global Seminars Program. Students may receive credit for one of the following: HIUS 125GS, HIUS 125, or ETHN 163J.

HIUS 126. The History of Race in the United States (4)
Examines key periods, events, and processes throughout the twentieth century that shaped the way Americans thought about race. Also examines the historical development of the category of race and racism, as well as how it is lived in everyday life.

HIUS 128. African American Legal History (4)
This course sketches the shifting experience persons of African descent have had with the law in the United States. Films, cases, articles, and book excerpts are used to convey the complex nature of this four-hundred-year journey.

HIUS 129/USP 106. The History of Race and Ethnicity in American Cities (4)
This class examines the history of racial and ethnic groups in American cities. It looks at major forces of change such as immigration to cities, political empowerment, and social movements, as well as urban policies such as housing segregation.

HIUS 130. Cultural History from 1607 to 1865 (4)
This course will explore connections between American culture and the transformations of class relations, gender ideology, and political thought. Topics will include the transformations of religious perspectives and practices, republican art and architecture, artisan and working-class culture, the changing place of art and artists in American society, antebellum reform movements, antislavery and proslavery thought. +

HIUS 131. Cultural History from 1865 to 1917 (4)
This course will focus on the transformation of work and leisure and the development of consumer culture. Students consider connections among culture, class, racial and gender ideologies, and politics. Topics include labor management and radicalism, organized sports, museums, commercial entertainment, world fairs, reactionary movements, and imperialism.

HIUS 131D. Cultural History from the Civil War to the Present (4)
This course will focus on the transformation of work and leisure and development of consumer culture. Students will consider connections between culture, class relations, gender ideology, and politics. Topics will include labor radicalism, Taylorism, the development of organized sports, the rise of department stores, and the transformation of middle-class sexual culture of the Cold War.

HIUS 132S. The Civil War and Reconstruction in Popular Culture (4)
This course considers how cultural processes have shaped histories of the Civil War and Reconstruction. Students will analyze the relationship between popular culture and major themes of the era through the use of literature, texts, film, television, and print images. Students who took HIUS 132 cannot repeat this course.

HIUS 133. The Golden Age of Piracy (4)
This interdisciplinary lecture course focuses on the history and literature of global piracy in the English-speaking world from Sir Francis Drake to Blackbeard and how this Golden Age was remembered in the popular fiction of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Students may not receive credit for HIUS 133 and HIUS 133GS. +

HIUS 133GS. The Golden Age of Piracy (4)
This interdisciplinary lecture course focuses on the history and literature of global piracy in the English-speaking world from Sir Francis Drake to Blackbeard and how this Golden Age was remembered in the popular fiction of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Program or materials fees may apply. Students must apply and be accepted into the Global Seminars Program. Students may not receive credit for HIUS 133 and HIUS 133GS.

HIUS 134. From Bebop to Hip-Hop: African American Cultural History since 1945 (4)
Explore the politics of black culture in the postwar period. Topics include the dynamic interplay of social factors (migration, civil rights, black power, deindustrialization, globalization) and the production of African American culture, including music, film, and literature.

HIUS 135. The Atlantic World, 1492–1803 (4)
This course focuses on the role the Atlantic played in bringing together in both volatile and beneficial ways the remarkably different cultures of four continents from the Columbian Exchange to the Haitian Revolution. Students may not receive credit for HIUS 135 and 135A or 135B. +

HIUS 136/ETHN 153. Citizenship and Civil Rights in the Twentieth Century (4)
This course traces the history of the institution of US citizenship in the last century, tracing changing notions of racial, cultural, and gender differences, the evolution of the civil rights struggle, and changes in laws governing citizenship and access to rights.

HIUS 137. Mining and American History (4)
This course examines the critical role mining played in the economic, political, and social history of the United States since the late 1800s. Topics discussed in the course will include labor movements, engineering, science and industry, foreign policy, and natural resource dependence.

HIUS 139/ETHN 149. African American History in the Twentieth Century (4)
This course examines the transformation of African America across the expanse of the long twentieth century: imperialism, migration, urbanization, desegregation, and deindustrialization. Special emphasis will be placed on issues of culture, international relations, and urban politics.

HIUS 140/ECON 158. Economic History of the United States I (4)
The United States as a raw materials producer, as an agrarian society, and as an industrial nation. Emphasis on the logic of the growth process, the social and political tensions accompanying expansion, and nineteenth- and early twentieth-century transformations of American capitalism.

HIUS 141/ECON 159. Economic History of the United States II (4)
The United States as modern industrial nation. Emphasis on the logic of the growth process, the social and political tensions accompanying expansion, and twentieth-century transformations of American capitalism.

HIUS 142A. United States in the Twentieth Century, 1900–1945 (4)
Examines the political, economic, and social history of the American people from the turn of the twentieth century to the end of World War II. Topics: progressive movement, impact of the Great Depression, and the consequences of two world wars.

HIUS 142B. United States in the Twentieth Century, 1945 to the Present (4)
Examines the political, economic and social history of the American people from the end of World War II to present. Topics: origins of the Cold War, struggle for racial justice and the rise of American conservatism since the 1980s.

HIUS 143. The Built Environment in the Twentieth Century (4)
An examination of urban and regional planning as well as piecemeal change in the built environment. Topics include urban and suburban housing, work environments, public spaces, transportation and utility infrastructures, utopianism.

HIUS 143GS. The Built Environment in the Twentieth Century (4)
An examination of urban and regional planning as well as piecemeal change in the built environment. Topics include urban and suburban housing, work environments, public spaces, transportation and utility infrastructures, and utopianism. Program or materials fees may apply. Students must apply and be accepted into the Global Seminars Program. Students may not receive credit for HIUS 143 and HIUS 143GS.

HIUS 144. Topics in US History (4)
Selected topics in US history. Course may be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. 

HIUS 145. From New Era to New Deal (4)
This course will examine the economic, social, and political changes underway in the United States from 1917 to 1945. Topics will include the 1920s, the Great Depression, the New Deal and the consequences of two World Wars. 

HIUS 146. Race, Riots, and Violence in the U.S. (4)
Examining the history of urban riots in the United States since the late nineteenth century. Exploring how different groups of Americans have constructed competing notions of race, gender, labor, and national belonging by participating in street violence.

HIUS 148/USP 103. The American City in the Twentieth Century (4)
This course focuses on the phenomenon of modern American urbanization. Case studies of individual cities will help illustrate the social, political, and environmental consequences of rapid urban expansion, as well as the ways in which urban problems have been dealt with historically.

HIUS 149. The United States in the 1960s (4)
An overview of the social and political developments that polarized American society in the tumultuous decade of the 1960s. Themes include the social impact of the postwar baby boom, the domestic and foreign policy implications of the Cold War; the evolution of the civil rights and women’s movements; and the transformation of American popular culture.

HIUS 150. American Legal History to 1865 (4)
The history of American law and legal institutions. This quarter focuses on crime and punishment in the colonial era, the emergence of theories of popular sovereignty, the forging of the Constitution and American federalism, the relationship between law and economic change, and the crisis of slavery and Union. +

HIUS 151. American Legal History since 1865 (4)
The history of American law and legal institutions. This course examines race relations and law, the rise of big business, the origins of the modern welfare state during the Great Depression, the crisis of civil liberties produced by two world wars and McCarthyism, and the Constitutional revolution wrought by the Warren Court. HIUS 150 is not a prerequisite for HIUS 151.

HIUS 152A. A Constitutional History of the United States to 1865 (4)
The historical development of constitutional thought and practice in the United States from the era of the American Revolution through the Civil War, with special attention to the role of the Supreme Court under Chief Justices Marshall and Taney.

HIUS 152B. A Constitutional History of the United States since 1865 (4)
The historical development of constitutional thought and practice in the United States since 1865, with special attention to the role of the Supreme Court from Chief Justices Chase to Rehnquist. +

HIUS 153. American Political Trials (4)
Survey of politicized criminal trials and impeachments from Colonial times to the 1880s. Examines politically motivated prosecutions and trials that became subjects of political controversy, were exploited by defendants for political purposes, or had their outcomes determined by political considerations. +

HIUS 155. From Zoot Suits to Hip-Hop: Race and Popular Culture since World War II (4)
Tracing popular cultural production and consumption in the United States since World War II. It historicizes popular culture as an arena where social relations are negotiated and where race, class, and gender identities are constructed, transformed, and contested.

HIUS 155A. Religion and Law in American History: Foundations to the Civil War (4)
Selected problems in the history of the relationship between religious beliefs and practice and legal institutions in the Anglo-American world. Topics include the English background, religion in the age of the American Revolution and the antebellum period. +

HIUS 155B. Religion and Law in American History: Civil War to the Present (4)
Selected problems in the history of the relationship between religious beliefs and practice and legal institutions in America from the Civil War to the present. Topics include the religion and government aid; sacred duties and the law; and religion and cultural politics.

HIUS 156. American Women, American Womanhood (4)
This course explores the emergence of a dominant ideology of womanhood in America in the early nineteenth century and contrasts the ideal with the historically diverse experience of women of different races and classes, from settlement to 1870. Topics include witchcraft, evangelicalism, cult of domesticity, sexuality, rise of industrial capitalism and the transformation of women’s work, the Civil War, and the first feminist movement. +

HIUS 156D. American Women, American Womanhood (4)
This course explores the emergence of a dominant ideology of womanhood in America in the early nineteenth century and contrasts the ideal with the historically diverse experience of women of different races and classes, from settlement to 1870. Topics include witchcraft, evangelicalism, cult of domesticity, sexuality, rise of industrial capitalism and the transformation of women’s work, the Civil War, and the first feminist movement.

HIUS 157. American Women, American Womanhood 1870 to Present (4)
This course explores the making of the ideology of womanhood in modern America and the diversity of American women’s experience from 1870 to the present. Topics include the suffrage movement, the struggle for reproductive rights and the ERA; immigrant and working-class women, women’s work, and labor organization; education, the modern feminist movement and the contemporary politics of reproduction, including abortion and surrogate motherhood. 

HIUS 158/ETHN 130. Social and Economic History of the Southwest I (4)
This course examines the history of the Spanish and Mexican borderlands (what became the US Southwest) from roughly 1400 to the end of the U.S.-Mexico War in 1848, focusing specifically on the area’s social, cultural, and political development. +

HIUS 159/ETHN 131. Social and Economic History of the Southwest II (4)
Cross-listed as Ethnic Studies 131. This course examines the history of the American Southwest from the U.S.-Mexican War in 1846–48 to the present, focusing on immigration, racial and ethnic conflict, and the growth of Chicano national identity.

HIUS 160/260. Colloquium on the American Empire (4)
Course explores the concept of an American Empire by examination of the literature on the topic. Particular attention will be on the work since 9/11/01. Students are expected to produce original work concerning the definition and/or existence of an American Empire. Graduate students are expected to submit an additional piece of work. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. Department stamp required.

HIUS 162/262. The American West (4)
This seminar will trace major themes in the history of the American West. Topics will include ethnicity, the environment, urbanization, demographics, and shifting concepts surrounding the significance of the West. Graduate students will be required to submit additional work in order to receive graduate credit for the course. Prerequisites: department stamp required.

HIUS 167/267/ETHN 180. Topics in Mexican American History (4)
This colloquium studies the racial representation of Mexican Americans in the United States from the nineteenth century to the present, examining critically the theories and methods of the humanities and social sciences. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

HIUS 168/268. Race, Resistance, and Cultural Politics (4)
The course investigates race, resistance, and culture in the United States since the late nineteenth century. It interrogates how working-class whites, African Americans, Latinos, Asian Americans, and others have simultaneously challenged, shaped, and assimilated into US society. May be coscheduled with HIUS 268. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.

HIUS 169/269. Topics in American Legal and Constitutional History (4)
A reading and discussion course on topics that vary from year to year, including American federalism, the history of civil liberties, and the Supreme Court. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

HIUS 174. Race Wars in American Culture (4)
This seminar examines race and war in US history, with an emphasis on their intersections and co-constitutions. Topics include frontier wars and “manifest destiny;” border enforcement, antiradicalism, the war on drugs, and mass incarceration; and the war on terror. Prerequisites: department approval required.

HIUS 176/276. Race and Sexual Politics (4)
This seminar will explore the histories of sexual relations, politics, and cultures that both cross and define racial boundaries in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Reading will focus on the United States as well as take up studies sited in Canada and Latin America. Graduate students are expected to submit a more substantial piece of work. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

HIUS 178/278 The Atlantic World, 1400–1800 (4)
This course explains the origin of the Atlantic as a zone of interaction for Europeans, indigenous Americans, and Africans, and evaluates the consequences of the interaction over several centuries by exploring contests over political power and economic/demographic change. Graduate students will submit a more substantial piece of work with in-depth analysis and with an increased number of sources cited. A typical undergraduate paper would be ten pages, whereas a typical graduate paper would require engagement with primary sources, more extensive reading of secondary material, and be about twenty pages. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp. +

HIUS 180/280/ETHN 134. Immigration and Ethnicity in Modern American Society (4)
Comparative study of immigration and ethnic-group formation in the United States from 1880 to the present. Topics include immigrant adaptation, competing theories about the experiences of different ethnic groups, and the persistence of ethnic attachments in modern American society. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

HIUS 181/281. Topics in Twentieth Century United States History (4)
A colloquium dealing with special topics in US history from 1900 to the present. Themes will vary from year to year. Prerequisites: department stamp or consent of instructor.

HIUS 182. Special Topics in Intellectual History (4)
Cultural and political construction of the American nation. Topics include how citizenship and national community were imagined and contested; importance of class, gender, and race in the nation’s public sphere; debates over slavery, expansion, and democracy in defining national purpose. Requirements will vary for undergraduates, MA, and PhD students. Graduate students are required to submit a more substantial paper.

HIUS 183. Topics in African American History (4)
A colloquium dealing with special topics in the history of people of African descent in the United States. Course may be taken for credit up to three times, as topics will vary from quarter to quarter. Prerequisites: department stamp or consent of instructor.

HIUS 185/285. In the Public Interest (4)
In this seminar, we will examine the shifting boundary between what constitutes a public and a private concern in twentieth-century US history. We will consider issues such as civil rights, immigration, health care, and the regulation of financial institutions. Prerequisites: department stamp required for HIUS 185. Instructor approval required for HIUS 285.

HIUS 186. Topics in US Economic History (4)
Selected topics in US economic history. Course may be taken for credit a total of three times, as topics vary. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

HIUS 188/288. Topics in Culture and Politics (4)
Colloquium on select topics in culture and politics in the United States. Topics will vary from quarter to quarter. Graduate students will be required to submit an additional piece of work. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.

HIUS 198. Directed Group Study (4)
Directed group study on United States history under the supervision of a member of the faculty on a topic not generally included in the regular curriculum. Students must make arrangements with individual faculty members.

HIUS 199. Independent Study in United States History (4)
Directed readings for undergraduates under the supervision of various faculty members. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and department stamp required.

HDS 1. Introduction to Human Developmental Sciences (4)
This course introduces students to the central issues in the basic areas in human development. The course will explain relationships between biological, cognitive, social, and cultural aspects of development across the life span. Renumbered from HDP 1. Students may not receive credit for HDP 1 and HDS 1.

HDS 60. Introduction to Statistical Analysis (4)
This course provides an introduction to both descriptive and inferential statistics, core tools in the process of scientific discovery, and the interpretation of research. Emphasis on a conceptual understanding of statistics, numerical results of real data, and techniques of data analysis.

HDS 95. Career Development Seminar (1–2)
This course is centered on conceptual understanding of career development as a lifespan process, with an emphasis on application to student’s individual academic development and career readiness competencies. Includes practical training with professional skills, networking, and career research. The course concludes with a career action plan to help students advance academic and career goals. Cannot be used toward HDS major credit.

HDS 98. Directed Group Study (1–2)
Directed group study, on a topic or in a field not included in the department curriculum, by arrangement with a faculty member. Pass/No Pass grades only. Cannot be used toward HDS major credit. Renumbered from HDP 98. HDS 98 and/or HDP 98 may be taken for credit for a combined total of three times. Prerequisites: completion of thirty units and a minimum UC San Diego GPA of 3.0. Students may enroll for no more than a total of two units in one quarter. Department authorization required.

HDS 99. Independent Study in Human Developmental Sciences (2–4)
Independent study and research under the direction of an affiliated human developmental sciences faculty member. Pass/No Pass only. Cannot be used toward HDS major credit. Renumbered from HDP 99. HDS 99 and/or HDP 99 may be taken for credit for a combined total of three times. Prerequisites: completion of thirty units and a minimum UC San Diego GPA of 3.0. Department authorization required.

HDS 110. Brain and Behavioral Development (4)
The purpose of this course is to familiarize students with basic mechanisms of brain and behavioral development from embryology through aging. Multiple levels of analysis will be discussed, including the effects of hormones on behavior, developmental events at the level of cells, structures, and neural systems, and the neural basis of cognition, social, perceptual, and language development. Renumbered from HDP 110. Students may not receive credit for HDP 110 and HDS 110. Prerequisites: HDP 1 or HDS 1 or PSYC 101.

HDS 111. Evolutionary Principles in Human Development (4)
The course will examine the human evolutionary past to inform our understanding of the biological, cognitive, and socio-cultural aspects of growth and change across the life span. Lectures and readings will draw from diverse fields to situate our understanding of human development within its broader evolutionary context. Areas of focus will include but are not limited to human longevity, biology of growth, theory of mind, and social and biological development in cross-species comparison. Renumbered from HDP 111. Students may not receive credit for HDP 111 and HDS 111. Prerequisites: HDP 1 or HDS 1 or ANTH 2 or BILD 3.

HDS 120. Language Development (4)
Examination of children’s acquisition of language from babbling to the formation of sentences. Topics covered include prelinguistic gestures, relationships between babbling and sound systems, speech perception, linking words with objects, rule overgeneralization, bilingualism, nature vs. nurture, individual differences, and cultural differences. Renumbered from HDP 120. Students may not receive credit for HDP 120 and HDS 120. Prerequisites: HDP 1 or HDS 1 or LIGN 4.

HDS 121. The Developing Mind (4)
(Same as COGS 110.) This course examines changes in thinking and perceiving the physical and social world from birth through childhood. Evidence of significant changes in encoding information, forming mental representations, and solving problems is culled from psychological research, cross-cultural studies, and cognitive science. Cross-listed course HDS 121 has been renumbered from HDP 121. Students may receive credit for one of the following: COGS 110, HDS 121, or HDS 121. Prerequisites: HDP 1 or HDS 1 or COGS 1.

HDS 122. Development of Social Cognition (4)
This course covers topics in development of social cognition across the life span. Grounded in current research and theoretical models, content addresses general principles such as the mutual influences of caregivers and children upon each other and the interplay of person and context. Discussion areas include attachment, aggression, identity development, social cognition, social components of achievement motivation, and development of conscience. Renumbered from HDP 122. Students may not receive credit for HDP 122 and HDS 122. Prerequisites: HDP 1 or HDS 1.

HDS 133. Cross-Cultural Perspectives on Developmental Science (4)
This course examines how human development varies cross-culturally across the life span. It explores human developmental science as a bio-social-cultural process, in which development is not simply a product of biology and genetics, but shaped by the particular cultural traditions and patterns of social interactions into which an individual is born. Renumbered from HDP 133. Students may not receive credit for HDP 133 and HDS 133. Prerequisites: HDP 1 or HDS 1 or PSYC 1.

HDS 150. Senior Seminar (4)
Seminar for graduating HDS seniors. Readings and discussion of special topics in human developmental sciences. Provides advanced-level study on subfields of human development. Topics vary quarterly. Renumbered from HDP 150. HDS 150 and/or HDP 150 may be repeated for a combined total of two times when topics vary. Prerequisites: senior standing, HDP 181 or HDS 181. Department approval required. (F,W,S)

HDS 160. Special Topics Seminar in Human Developmental Sciences (4)
Special topics in human developmental sciences are discussed. Renumbered from HDP 160. HDS 160 and/or HDP 160 may be taken for credit for a combined total of three times when topics vary. Prerequisites: upper-division standing, department approval required.

HDS 171. Diversity in Human Development: A Cultural Competency Approach (4)
This course provides an introduction to the scholarship and practice of cultural competency, with a goal of enhancing the ability of students to be effective researchers and community service partners. Through relevant readings, associated assignments, and community guest speakers, students will acquire the necessary skills for doing substantive and responsive research in diverse cultural contexts. Renumbered from HDP 171. Students may not receive credit for HDP 171 and HDS 171. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

HDS 173. Race, Media, and Identity Development Across the Lifespan (4)
This course offers a critical analysis of the social, linguistic, and cultural dimensions of media, schooling, and racial identity development over the lifespan. It attends to how “power dynamics of representation” shape individual and community identity, examining how representation affects (in)equitable educational experiences, learning, achievement, and outcomes. Drawing on historical and contemporary theories, research, and tools, the curriculum fosters applied critical race media literacy. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

HDS 175. Power, Wealth, and Inequality in Human Development (4)
Inequality affects social mobility and opportunities for diverse communities in the United States, having long-term implications for life span development. A multidisciplinary approach examines the differential effects on development fostered by disparities in socio-economic, educational, and cultural factors. Renumbered from HDP 175. Students may not receive credit for HDP 175 and HDS 175. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

HDS 181. Experimental Projects in Human Development Research (6)
This laboratory course in human developmental sciences is designed around a variety of intensive experimental projects. With lectures providing background information on research methods and life span development, each assignment will include data collection and/or analysis, and a written laboratory report. Renumbered from HDP 181. Students may not receive credit for HDP 181 and HDS 181. Prerequisites: HDS 1 and BIEB 100 or COGS 14B or ECON 120A or MATH 11 or POLI 30 or POLI 30D or PSYC 60. Department approval required. A minimum of three upper-division HDS major courses, at least one in each domain, is needed for enrollment approval. Must be a declared HDS major. (F,W,S)

HDS 191. Field Research in Human Development (6)
This course is designed around students’ applied qualitative Field Research experience. With weekly lectures introducing the basic methodology of human development research, HDS majors are provided the necessary tools to create their own empirical Field Research project, conducted (four hours/week) at a pre-approved study site. Students must submit the pre-enrollment questionnaire one academic year prior to enrollment. See the HDS website for details. Renumbered from HDP 191. Students may not receive credit for HDP 191 and HDS 191. Prerequisites: HDS 1 and HDS 181. Department approval required. (F,W,S)

HDS 193. Advanced Research in Human Developmental Sciences (4)
Specialized research project under the direction of a human developmental sciences affiliated faculty member. Renumbered from HDP 193. Students may not receive more than a combined total of eight units of credit for HDP 193 and HDS 193. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; department approval required. Overall GPA of 2.8, one lab course, and three HDS core courses completed.

HDS 194A-B-C. Honors Thesis in Human Developmental Sciences (4-4-4)
Students carry out a three-quarter research project, under the guidance of a faculty member, that will form the basis for their senior honors thesis in the human developmental sciences major. Renumbered from HDP 194A-B-C. Students may not receive credit for HDP 194A-B-C and HDS 194A-B-C. Prerequisites: overall GPA of 3.2, and a 3.5 GPA for courses taken in the HDS major; an advanced course in statistics or experimental design, department approval, and consent of instructor required.

HDS 195. Instructional Apprentice in Human Developmental Sciences (4)
Introduction to teaching within human developmental sciences. Under the direction of the instructor, students attend lectures, lead discussion sections, review course readings, and meet regularly to prepare course materials and to evaluate examinations and papers. Course not counted toward HDS major or minor. Pass/No Pass only. Renumbered from HDP 195. Students may not receive more than a combined total of eight units of credit for HDP 195 and HDS 195. Prerequisites: overall GPA of 3.0, 90 units completed, department approval, and consent of instructor required.

HDS 199. Independent Study in Human Developmental Sciences (4)
Independent study and research under the direction of an affiliated human developmental sciences faculty member. Pass/No Pass only. Renumbered from HDP 199. HDP 199 and/or HDS 199 may be taken for credit for a combined total of three times. Cannot be used toward HDS major credit. Prerequisites: department approval and consent of the instructor required; completion of at least ninety undergraduate units with a minimum of 2.5 GPA, and a completed and approved Special Studies form.

HMNR 100/SOCI 174/HITO 119. Introduction to Human Rights and Global Justice (4)
Explores where human rights come from and what they mean by integrating them into a history of modern society, from the Conquest of the Americas and the origins of the Enlightenment, to the Holocaust and the contemporary human rights regime.

HMNR 101/ANSC 140 or COMM 114A. Human Rights II: Contemporary Issues (4)
Interdisciplinary discussion that outlines the structure and functioning of the contemporary human rights regime, and then delves into the relationship between selected human rights protections—against genocide, torture, enslavement, political persecution, etc.—and their violation, from early Cold War to the present.

HUM 1. The Foundations of Western Civilization: Israel and Greece (6)
Texts from the Hebrew Bible and from Greek epic, history, drama, and philosophy in their cultural context. Revelle students must take course for letter grade. Prerequisites: satisfaction of the UC Entry Level Writing requirement.

HUM 2. Rome, Christianity, and the Middle Ages (6)
The Roman Empire, the Christian transformation of the classical world in late antiquity, and the rise of a European culture during the Middle Ages. Representative texts from Latin authors, early Christian literature, the Germanic tradition, and the high Middle Ages. Revelle students must take course for letter grade. Prerequisites: satisfaction of the UC Entry Level Writing requirement.

HUM 3. Renaissance, Reformation, and Early Modern Europe (4)
The revival of classical culture and values and the reaction against medieval ideas concerning the place of human beings in the world. The Protestant Reformation and its intellectual and political consequences. The philosophical background to the scientific revolution. Revelle students must take the course for a letter grade. Students may not receive credit for HUM 3 and HUM 3GS. Prerequisites: completion of HUM 1 or HUM 2.

HUM 3GS. Renaissance, Reformation, and Early Modern Europe (4)
The revival of classical culture and values and the reaction against medieval ideas concerning the place of human beings in the world. The Protestant Reformation and its intellectual and political consequences. The philosophical background to the scientific revolution. Revelle students must take the course for a letter grade. Students may not receive credit for HUM 3 and 3GS. Prerequisites: acceptance into Global Seminar Program.

HUM 4. Enlightenment, Romanticism, Revolution (4)
The Enlightenment’s revisions of traditional thought; the rise of classical liberalism; the era of the first modern political revolutions; Romantic ideas of nature and human life. Revelle students must take course for letter grade. Students may receive credit for one of the following: HUM 4, HUM 4R, or HUM 4GS. Prerequisites: satisfaction of the UC Entry Level Writing requirement.

HUM 4R. Enlightenment, Romanticism, Revolution (4)
The Enlightenment’s revisions of traditional thought; the rise of classical liberalism; the era of the first modern political revolutions; Romantic ideas of nature and human life. This course is a distance education course. Revelle students must take course for letter grade. Students may receive credit for one of the following: HUM 4, HUM 4R, or HUM 4GS.

HUM 4GS. Enlightenment, Romanticism, Revolution (4)
This five-week global seminar in Edinburgh will examine the core philosophical, scientific, political, and cultural ideas that formed the basis of the Enlightenment, the romantic movement, and revolutions in Europe and America from the late seventeenth century through the first half of the nineteenth century. Revelle students must take course for letter grade. Students may receive credit for one of the following: HUM 4, HUM 4R, or HUM 4GS. Prerequisites: acceptance into Global Seminar Program.

HUM 5. Modern Culture (1848–present) (4)
Challenges to liberalism posed by such movements as socialism, imperialism, and nationalism; the growth of new forms of self-expression and new conceptions of individual psychology. Revelle students must take course for letter grade. Prerequisites: satisfaction of the UC Entry Level Writing requirement.

HUM 100. Advanced Topics in the Humanities (4)
An upper-division course designed to strengthen students’ critical reading and analytical writing skills through engagement with core texts in the humanities on a selected theme.

HUM 119. Special Topics in Humanities (4)
An in-depth study of topics in the humanities. Subject matter varies, focusing on one author, intellectual topic, or specific historical tradition. May be repeated up to three times for credit when topics vary.

HUM 195. Methods of Teaching Humanities (4)
An introduction to teaching humanities. Students are required to attend weekly discussions on methods of teaching humanities and will teach discussion sections of one of the humanities courses. Attendance at lecture of the course in which the student is participating is required. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

HUM 199. Special Studies (2–4)
Individually guided readings or projects in area of humanities not normally covered in standard curriculum. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

INTL 97. Internship (1)
Independent research connected to an internship with an organization relevant to the career interests of a student of international studies. Topic of the required research to be determined by the supervising faculty member. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit eight times. Prerequisites: department approval required.

INTL 100. Analysis, Argument, and Real-World Problems (4)
Focuses on developing skills in analytic reading and writing while using an interdisciplinary approach to asking and answering real-world questions. Lectures are topical and built around a series of readings that build in complexity and nuance; students work in an iterative process that builds toward a final policy memo project. Prerequisites: sophomore standing or above and completion of at least one quarter of a university-level writing course.

INTL 101. Culture and Society in International Perspective (4)
Analysis of the cultural and social development of the modern era from the perspective of interaction among societies. Particular attention is paid to the definition, representation, and negotiation of social and cultural boundaries over time. Prerequisites: completion of INTL 100 with a grade of C– or better.

INTL 102. Economics, Politics, and International Change (4)
Examination of the domestic and international sources of economic and political change. Topics include the rise of the nation-state, comparative economic development, authoritarian and democratic regimes, international and civil conflict, globalization and its domestic and international implications. Prerequisites: completion of INTL 100 with a grade of C– or better.

INTL 190. Seminar in International Studies (4)
Readings and discussion of topics in international and comparative studies from an interdisciplinary perspective. Emphasis on independent work and completion of a research paper. Prerequisites: open to international studies majors only; successful completion with a C– or better of INTL 100, INTL 101, and 102.

INTL 190H. Honors Seminar in International Studies (4)
Required of all honors students in International Studies. Reading and discussion of topics in international and comparative studies from an interdisciplinary perspective. Emphasis on research design and completion of research paper in preparation for INTL 196H. Prerequisites: international studies major with 3.5 major GPA; department application process required; senior standing; INTL 100; INTL 101; INTL 102.

INTL 196H. International Studies Honors Program (4)
Open only to seniors who have completed INTL 190H. Completion of an honors thesis under the supervision of a member of the International Studies faculty. Prerequisites: international studies major with 3.5 major GPA; department approval; senior standing; INTL 190H.

INTL 197. Internship (1)
Independent research connected to an internship with an organization relevant to the career interests of a student of international studies. Topic of the required research to be determined by the supervising faculty member. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit eight times. Prerequisites: department approval required; junior and senior standing.

JAPN 10A. First-Year Japanese (5)
This course is an introduction to the Japanese language. Students will learn basic skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing over seventy-five characters. Students will also acquire fundamental knowledge of Japanese grammar and learn about Japanese people and culture.

JAPN 10B. First-Year Japanese (5)
This course is an introduction to the Japanese language. Students will learn basic skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing over seventy-two additional characters. Students will also acquire fundamental knowledge of Japanese grammar and learn about Japanese people and culture. Prerequisites: previous course or consent of instructor.

JAPN 10C. First-Year Japanese (5)
This course is an introduction to the Japanese language. Students will learn basic skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing over forty-eight additional characters. Students will also acquire fundamental knowledge of Japanese grammar and learn about Japanese people and culture. Prerequisites: previous course or consent of instructor.

JAPN 20A. Second-Year Japanese (5)
Students will improve their fundamental skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing including acquiring knowledge of Japanese transportation, trips, and geography. Prerequisites: previous course or consent of instructor.

JAPN 20B. Second-Year Japanese (5)
Students will improve their fundamental skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing including acquiring knowledge of life experiences, Japanese culture, customs, health, and school. Prerequisites: previous course or consent of instructor.

JAPN 20C. Second-Year Japanese (5)
Students will improve their fundamental skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing including acquiring knowledge of Japanese culture and customs. Students will conduct research including writing a short essay and presentation. Prerequisites: previous course or consent of instructor.

JAPN 130A. Third-Year Japanese (4)
This course will require students to gain knowledge, comprehend, evaluate, and discuss Japanese customs. Students will critically analyze and compare culture and customs of Japan and other countries. Course work includes student research on issues in Japanese society. Prerequisites: previous course or consent of instructor.

JAPN 130B. Third-Year Japanese (4)
This course will require students to gain knowledge, comprehend, evaluate, and discuss topics of education system and youth issues in Japan and other countries. Students will learn vocabulary and phrases to support, explain, research, and hypothesize concrete and abstract topics. Prerequisites: previous course or consent of instructor.

JAPN 130C. Third-Year Japanese (4)
This course will require students to gain knowledge, comprehend, evaluate, and discuss the environment and internationalization issues. Students will learn vocabulary and phrases to critically analyze and compare, express their opinions, and present and propose possible solutions for these topics. Prerequisites: previous course or consent of instructor.

JAPN 135A. Japanese for Professional Purposes (4)
Training in oral and written communication skills for professional settings in Japanese. Broad aspects of cultural issues in Japanese organizations are introduced and comparison of American and Japanese cultural business patterns will be conducted. Prerequisites: JAPN 20C, or consent of instructor.

JAPN 135B. Japanese for Professional Purposes (4)
Continuation of training in oral and written communication skills for professional settings in Japanese. Broad aspects of cultural issues in Japanese organizations are introduced and comparison of American and Japanese cultural business patterns will be conducted. Prerequisites: JAPN 135A, or consent of instructor.

JAPN 135C. Japanese for Professional Purposes (4)
Continuation of training in oral and written communication skills for professional settings in Japanese. Broad aspects of cultural issues in Japanese organizations are introduced and comparison of American and Japanese cultural business patterns will be conducted. Prerequisites: JAPN 135B.

JAPN 140A. Fourth-Year Japanese (4)
This course will enable students to acquire advanced skills in speaking, listening, reading, and writing in the topics of Japanese youth culture and their way of thinking. Prerequisites: previous course or consent of instructor.

JAPN 140B. Fourth-Year Japanese (4)
This course will enable students to acquire advanced skills in speaking, listening, reading, and writing in the topics of career building and obtaining a job in Japan. Prerequisites: previous course or consent of instructor.

JAPN 140C. Fourth-Year Japanese (4)
This course will enable students to acquire advanced skills in speaking, listening, reading, and writing in the topics of globalization in language, food, and culture in Japan, the U.S., and other countries. Prerequisites: previous course or consent of instructor.

JAPN 150A-B-C. Advanced Japanese (4-4-4)
This course is for advanced-level Japanese language learners. Students will train to further develop their academic language skills through various discussion topics such as social, cultural, and political issues. Prerequisites: previous course or consent of instructor.

JWSP 1. Beginning Hebrew (5)
Acquisition of basic vocabulary, fundamentals of Hebrew grammar, conversation, and reading.

JWSP 2. Intermediate Hebrew (5)
Continued study of vocabulary and grammar, emphasis on fluency in conversation, and reading.

JWSP 3. Intermediate Hebrew, Continued (5)
Vocabulary, grammar, conversation, introduction to literary and nonliterary texts.

JWSP 87. First-year Student Seminar (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit four times. Seminars are open to sophomores, juniors, and seniors on a space available basis.

JWSP 101. Introduction to Hebrew Texts (4)
Reading and analysis of texts from Biblical through modern authors, study of advanced vocabulary and grammar. Course taught in Hebrew and in English.

JWSP 102. Intermediate Hebrew Texts (4)
Further reading and analysis of Hebrew literature from a range of periods. Advanced grammar and vocabulary. Course taught in Hebrew and in English.

JWSP 103. Advanced Hebrew Texts (4)
Synthesis of fluency, reading, and grammatical skills. Reading of texts from a range of periods.

JWSP 104. Practicum in Advanced Hebrew (4)
Students will read texts and/or view films on a particular topic (topics will rotate on a four-year cycle) in the original Hebrew. Students will build skills in translating from Hebrew to English, in advanced grammar, and will cover a topic related to either modern Israel or pre-1948 Hebrew language literature and thought. The Hebrew lecturer will accommodate students with a basic knowledge of Hebrew, and will offer supplementary assignments for advanced students.

JWSP 110. Introduction to Judaism (4)
An introductory survey of Jewish history, literature, and culture from antiquity to contemporary times. Topics include sacred texts; the variety of groups and views of Judaism; the historical and geographical movements of the Jewish people; and the intersection of religion, ethnicity, and culture.

JWSP 111. Topics in Judaic Studies (4)
Study of a particular period, theme, or literature in Jewish civilization. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

JWSP 130. Introduction to the Old Testament: The Historical Books (4)
This course will study the historical books of the Hebrew Bible (in English), Genesis through 2 Kings, through a literary-historical approach: how, when, and why the Hebrew Bible came to be written down, its relationship with known historical facts, and the archaeological record. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

JWSP 131. Introduction to the Old Testament: The Poetic Books (4)
This course will study the prophetic and poetic books of the Hebrew Bible (in English), through a literary-historical approach. Topics include prophecy, social justice, monotheism, suffering, humor, and love. Prerequisites: JWSP 100A; upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

JWSP 196A. Jewish Studies Honors Course (4)
First quarter of honors thesis research for students accepted into honors program. Research is conducted under the supervision of a faculty member selected with the approval of the director of the Jewish Studies Program. Prerequisites: admission to Jewish Studies Honors Program; JWSP 100, JWSP103, HITO 104, HITO 105; upper-division electives in Jewish studies; at least junior standing; overall 3.3 GPA; 3.5 in Jewish studies.

JWSP 196B. Jewish Studies Honors Course (4)
Second quarter of honors thesis research for students accepted into honors program. Research is conducted under the supervision of a faculty member selected with the approval of the director of the Jewish Studies Program. Prerequisites: admission to Jewish Studies Honors Program; previous enrollment in JWSP 196A; JWSP 100, JWSP 103, HITO 104, HITO 105; upper-division electives in Jewish studies; at least junior standing; overall 3.3 GPA; 3.5 in Jewish studies.

JWSP 198. Directed Group Study in Jewish Studies (1-4)
Directed group study on a topic not generally included in the regular curriculum. Student must make arrangements with individual faculty members. (P/NP only)

JWSP 199. Independent Study in Jewish Studies (1-4)
Independent study on a topic not generally included in the regular curriculum. Student must make arrangements with individual faculty members. (P/NP only)

LATI 10. Reading North by South: Latin American Studies and the US Liberation Movements (4)
The purpose of this class is to study the multilayered relations between Latin American studies and the US liberation movements, particularly Third World movements, the Chicano movement, the black liberation movement, the indigenous movement, human rights activism, and trans-border activism. Students may not receive credit for LATI 100 and LATI 10.

LATI 50. Introduction to Latin America (4)
Interdisciplinary overview of society and culture in Latin America—including Mexico, the Caribbean, and South America: legacies of conquest, patterns of economic development, changing roles of women, expressions of popular culture, cycles of political change, and US-Latin American relations.

LATI 87. First-year Student Seminar (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students.

LATI 150. Digital Oral History in Latin America (4) 
An introduction to the theory and practice of digital oral history in Latin America. Students will be exposed to the history of orality in the region as a hybrid genre between literature, history, and ethnography. This class will provide a strong theoretical background on oral history as a constant presence in the Latin American cultural scene from the colonial chronicles to the political testimony. Prerequisites: LATI 50; upper-division standing.

LATI 180. Special Topics in Latin American Studies (4)
Readings and discussion of substantive issues and research in Latin American studies. Topics may include the study of a specific society or a particular issue in comparative cross-national perspective. Topics will vary from year to year. Prerequisites: LATI 50 or permission of instructor, upper-division standing.

LATI 190. Senior Seminar (4)
Research seminar on selected topics in the study of Latin America; all students will be required to prepare and present independent research papers. (Honors students will present drafts of senior research theses, of no less than fifty pages in length; nonhonors students will present final versions of analytical papers of approximately twenty-five to forty pages in length.) Prerequisites: satisfactory completion of LATI 50 and a working knowledge of Spanish.

LATI 191. Honors Seminar (4)
Independent reading and research under direction of a member of the faculty group in Latin American Studies; goal is to provide honors students with an opportunity to complete senior research thesis (to be defended before three-person interdisciplinary faculty committee). Prerequisites: successful completion of LATI 50, working knowledge of Spanish; minimum GPA of 3.5 in the major.

LATI 199. Individual Study (4)
Guided and supervised reading of the literature on Latin America in the interdisciplinary areas of anthropology, communications, economics, history, literature, political science, and sociology. For students majoring in Latin American Studies, reading will focus around potential topics for senior papers; for honors students in Latin American Studies, reading will culminate in formulation of a prospectus for the research thesis. Prerequisites: LATI 50 and working knowledge of Spanish.

LAWS 101. Contemporary Legal Issues (4)
This course will deal in depth each year with a different legal issue of contemporary significance, viewed from the perspectives of political science, history, sociology, and philosophy. Required for students completing the Law and Society minor. May be repeated for credit once, for a maximum total of eight units. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

LAWS 102S. Crimes, Civil Wrongs, and Constitution (4)
Through lectures and discussions on several controversial topics, students are introduced to the subjects taught in the first year of law school. They learn briefing, case analysis, and the Socratic method of instruction, engage in role-playing exercises, and take law-school examinations. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

LIGN 101. Introduction to the Study of Language (4)
Language is what makes us human, but how does it work? This course focuses on speech sounds and sound patterns, how words are formed, organized into sentences, and understood, how language changes, and how it is learned. Prerequisites: none.

LIGN 105. Law and Language (4)
The interpretation of language in understanding the law: 1) the language of courtroom interaction (hearsay, jury instructions); 2) written legal language (contracts, ambiguity, legal fictions); 3) language-based issues in the law (First Amendment, libel and slander). Prerequisites: none.

LIGN 108. Languages of Africa (4)
Africa is home to an astonishing variety of languages. This course investigates the characteristics of the major language families as well as population movements and language contact, and how governments attempt to regulate language use. Prerequisites: none.

LIGN 110. Phonetics (4)
The study of sounds that are used in human languages. How speech sounds are physically produced; acoustics of speech; speech perception; practical training in phonetic transcription and in interpreting visual representations of the acoustic signal. The class covers both English and its dialects and languages other than English. Prerequisites: LIGN 101, concurrent enrollment in LIGN 101, or consent of instructor.

LIGN 111. Phonology I (4)
Why does one language sound different from another? This course analyzes how languages organize sounds into different patterns, how those sounds interact, and how they fit into larger units, such as syllables. Focus on a wide variety of languages and problem solving. Prerequisites: LIGN 110.

LIGN 112. Speech Sounds and Speech Disorders (4)
How do we measure differences in the way sounds are produced and perceived? This course focuses on measuring and analyzing the acoustic and auditory properties of sounds as they occur in nonpathological and pathological speech. Prerequisites: LIGN 110 or consent of instructor.

LIGN 113. Hearing Science and Hearing Disorders (4)
An introductory course focused on the hearing component of speech, speech perception, and language disorders, this course gives students an introduction to the anatomy and function of human hearing, the principles and practice of audiology, and the modern methods of addressing hearing loss in patients like hearing aids and cochlear implants. Prerequisites: LIGN 101 and LIGN 110.

LIGN 115. Phonology II (4)
How are phonological systems organized, and what generalizations can be made about the phonological patterns found across languages? Exploration of advanced concepts in phonological theory through the analysis of cross-linguistic phenomena. Emphasis on empirical justification and argumentation. Prerequisites: LIGN 111.

LIGN 118. The Language of Comics (4)
How do we understand comic strips, comic books, and manga? We will examine the cognitive structures underlying comics, showing that this visual language of drawing and sequential images is understood similarly to spoken and signed languages. Recommended preparation: LIGN 101. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

LIGN 119. First and Second Language Learning: From Childhood through Adolescence (4)
(Same as EDS 119) An examination of how human language learning ability develops and changes over the first two decades of life, including discussion of factors that may affect this ability. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

LIGN 120. Morphology (4)
How do some languages express with one word complex meanings that English needs several words to express? Discovery of underlying principles of word formation through problem solving and analysis of data from a wide variety of languages. Prerequisites: LIGN 101 or consent of instructor.

LIGN 121. Syntax I (4)
What universal principles determine how words combine into phrases and sentences? Introduction to research methods and results. Emphasis on how argumentation in problem-solving can be used in the development of theories of language. Prerequisites: LIGN 101 or consent of instructor.

LIGN 125. Syntax II (4)
How are syntactic systems organized, and what generalizations can be made about the syntactic patterns found across languages? Exploration of advanced concepts in syntactic theory through the analysis of cross-linguistic phenomena. Emphasis on empirical justification and argumentation. Prerequisites: LIGN 121.

LIGN 130. Semantics (4)
Introduction to the formal study of meaning. What is the meaning of a word? What is the meaning of a sentence? Which role does the context play in determining linguistic meaning? Prerequisites: LIGN 101 or consent of instructor.

LIGN 139. Field Methods (4)
Methods and practice of gathering, processing, and analyzing data based on working with a native speaker of a language. Students gain experience in learning to discriminate and transcribe sounds and analyze grammatical features from their own collected data. Ethical and practical issues of working with native speakers and language communities are addressed. May be taken for credit up to two times. Recommended preparation: LIGN 111, LIGN 120, LIGN 121. Prerequisites: LIGN 101 and LIGN 110.

LIGN 141. Language Structures (4)
Detailed investigation of the structure of one or more languages. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Prerequisites: LIGN 101 or consent of instructor.

LIGN 143. The Structure of Spanish (4)
Surveys aspects of Spanish phonetics, phonology, morphology, and syntax. Topics include dialect differences between Latin American and Peninsular Spanish (both from a historical and contemporary viewpoint), gender classes, verbal morphology, and clause structure. Prerequisites: LIGN 101 or consent of instructor.

LIGN 144. Discourse Analysis: American Sign Language and Performing Arts (4)
This course provides a discourse-centered examination of ASL verbal arts: rhyme, meter, rhythm, handedness, non-manual signals, and spatial mapping; creation of scene and mood; properties of character, dialogue, narration, and voice; cultural tropes; poetic constructions in every genre; transcription, body memory, and performance. The course will be conducted entirely in ASL with no spoken English. Prerequisites: LISL 1C and LISL 1CX.

LIGN 146. Sociolinguistics in Deaf Communities (4)
This course provides an examination of sociolinguistic research on Deaf communities throughout the world, including sociohistorical contexts for phonological, lexical, and syntactic variation, contact between languages, multilingualism, language policies, and planning, second language learning, language attitudes, and discourse analysis of specific social contexts. The course will be conducted entirely in ASL with no spoken English. Prerequisites: LISL 1C and LISL 1CX.

LIGN 148. The Psycholinguistics of Gesture and Sign Languages (4)
The study of how sign languages are structured, and how they are understood and produced by adults. Topics include the contrast between gesture and language, sign language acquisition, brain processing, sociolinguistics, and the role of sign language in reading. Prerequisites: LIGN 101 or LISL 1C/1CX.

LIGN 149GS. The Historical Roots of American Sign Language (4)
Emphasizing linguistic evidence and historical documents, this course examines the roots of ASL with particular focus on contributions from Langue des Signes Francaise, Native American Sign Language, Black ASL, and Hawaiian Sign Language. Topics include illustrated and descriptive records documenting the linguistics of each language, and similarities and differences among the varieties. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: student must apply and be accepted to the global seminars program. Satisfies DEI requirement.

LIGN 150. Historical Linguistics (4)
Language is constantly changing. This course investigates the nature of language change, how to determine a language’s history, its relationship to other languages, and the search for common ancestors or “protolanguage.” Prerequisites: LIGN 101 or consent of instructor.

LIGN 152. Indigenous Languages of the Americas (4)
This course is an introduction to the study of the indigenous languages of the Americas. Its goals are to offer orientation in a broad field and to prepare students for possible future research. Topics covered include grammatical structures, genetic classification, characteristics of major language families, and factors affecting language use and mother tongue transmission of these languages in contemporary societies. Recommended preparation: LIGN 101.

LIGN 154. Language and Consciousness (4)
Origins of linguistic analysis (phonetics, phonology, morphology, thematic and grammatical relations, lexical semantics) in ancient India, history of naturalism vs. conventionalism, sound symbolism, relationship of language with myth and ritual, linguistic relativism, physical effects of language, metaphysical approaches to language. Prerequisites: LIGN 101.

LIGN 155. Evolution of Language (4)
History of thought on language origins, genetic, neural, anatomical, and gestural theories of language evolution in relation to prior hominid and other species, the role of generational differences in language acquisition, and computational models. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

LIGN 160. Pragmatics (4)
An introduction to the context-dependent aspects of language meaning. Topics include given versus new information, Gricean maxims and rules of conversation, presupposition, implicature, reference and cognitive status, discourse coherence and structure, and speech acts. Prerequisites: LIGN 101 or consent of instructor.

LIGN 165. Computational Linguistics (4)
An introduction to the fundamental concepts of computational linguistics, in which we study natural language syntax and semantics from an interpretation perspective, describe methods for programming computer systems to perform such interpretation, and survey applications of computational linguistics technology. Prerequisites: none.

LIGN 167. Deep Learning for Natural Language Understanding (4)
An introduction to neural network methods for analyzing linguistic data. Basic neural network architectures and optimization through backpropagation and stochastic gradient descent. Word vectors and recurrent neural networks, and their uses and limitations in modeling the structure of natural language. Prerequisites: MATH 10C or MATH 20C or MATH 31BH; ability to program.

LIGN 168. Computational Speech Processing (4)
An upper-division course focused on understanding some of the many approaches, algorithms, and processes used in the computational processing of speech, both by linguists and in industrial and engineering applications. We will consider topics like pitch and formant extraction, automatic speech recognition, and text-to-speech and voice transmission codecs. We’ll discuss the limitations of current approaches, and consider ongoing areas of growth and development in the field. Prerequisites: LIGN 110.

LIGN 170. Psycholinguistics (4)
The study of how humans learn, represent, comprehend, and produce language. Topics include visual and auditory recognition of words, sentence comprehension, reading, sentence production, language acquisition, neural representation of language, bilingualism, and language disorders. Prerequisites: LIGN 101, or upper-division standing, or consent of instructor.

LIGN 171. Child Language Acquisition (4)
A central cognitive, developmental mystery is how children learn their first language. Overview of research in the learning of sound systems, word forms and word meanings, and word combinations. Exploration of the relation between cognitive and language development. Prerequisites: LIGN 101, or upper-division standing, or consent of instructor.

LIGN 172. Psycholinguistics Laboratory Projects (4)
A project-oriented laboratory course (research) in which students learn and use experimental design, and are guided to develop their own ideas and tools, along with using state-of-the-art instruments to investigate a linguistic problem of current interest, under the direction of the instructor. A range of current topics in psycholinguistics is available including sentence and discourse processing, word comprehension and production, and cross-linguistic research. Prerequisites: LIGN 101 and (LIGN 170 or LIGN 171 or LIGN 180 or LIGN 181).

LIGN 174. Gender and Language in Society (4)
(Same as SOCI 116.) This course examines how language contributes to the social construction of gender identities, and how gender impacts language use and ideologies. Topics include the ways language and gender interact across the life span, within ethnolinguistic minority communities in the United States, across sexual orientations and cultures. Recommended preparation: LIGN 101, or upper-division standing, or consent of instructor.

LIGN 175. Sociolinguistics (4)
The study of language in its social context, with emphasis on the different types of linguistic variation and the principles underlying them. Dialects, registers, gender-based linguistic differences, multilingualism, pidginization and creolization, factors influencing linguistic choice, formal models of variation; emphasis is given both to socially determined differences within the United States and US ethnic groups and to cross-cultural differences in language use and variation. Prerequisites: LIGN 101 or consent of instructor. Satisfies DEI requirement.

LIGN 176. Language of Politics and Advertising (4)
How can we explain the difference between what is literally said versus what is actually conveyed in the language of law, politics, and advertising? How people’s ordinary command of language and their reasoning skills are used to manipulate them. Prerequisites: none.

LIGN 177. Multilingualism (4)
Official and minority languages, pidgins and Creoles, language planning, bilingual education and literacy, code switching, and language attrition. Prerequisites: LIGN 101, or upper-division standing, or consent of instructor.

LIGN 178. Spanish Sociolinguistics (4)
This course examines how social variables, such as age, education, gender, and social status may be linguistically expressed in different varieties of Spanish. Attitudes toward different linguistic variants and how these impact language policy will be studied. Special emphasis will be given to the varieties of Spanish spoken in the United States. Prerequisites: LIGN 101 or consent of instructor. Satisfies DEI requirement.

LIGN 179. Second Language Acquisition Research (4)
This course will investigate topics in second language acquisition including the critical period, the processing and neural representation of language in bilinguals, theories of second language acquisition and creolization, exceptional language learners, and parallels with first language acquisition. Prerequisites: LIGN 101, or upper-division standing, or consent of instructor.

LIGN 180. Language Representation in the Brain (4)
The mind/body problem, modularity, basic neuroanatomy, cerebral lateralization, re-evaluation of classical language areas, aphasia, dyslexia, the KE family and FOXP2 gene, mirror neurons, sign language, brain development, cortical plasticity, and localization studies of language processing (electrical stimulation, MEG, fMRI, and PET). Students may not receive credit for both LIGN 172 and LIGN 180. Prerequisites: LIGN 101, or upper-division standing, or consent of instructor.

LIGN 181. Language Processing in the Brain (4)
Modularity and models of language processing, basic neurophysiology, EEG/MEG, linguistic event-related brain potentials (ERPs), crosslinguistic functional significance of ERP components and their MEG correlates: N400, N400-700, lexical processing negativity, slow anterior negative potentials, (early) left anterior negativity, and late positivity. Prerequisites: LIGN 101, or upper-division standing, or consent of instructor.

LIGN 187. Seminar on Special Topics (4)
Special topics in linguistics are discussed. Prerequisites: As topics will vary with each offering, and will be advanced in level, the department must approve if students have already obtained the relevant background.

LIGN 192. Senior Seminar in Linguistics (1)
The Senior Seminar Program is designed to allow senior undergraduates to meet with faculty members in a small group setting to explore an intellectual topic in linguistics (at the upper-division level). Senior Seminars may be offered in all campus departments. Topics will vary from quarter to quarter. Senior Seminars may be taken for credit up to four times, with a change in topic, and permission of the department. Enrollment is limited to twenty students, with preference given to seniors. Prerequisites: department stamp and/or consent of instructor.

LIGN 195. Apprentice Teaching (0–4)
Students lead a class section of a lower-division linguistics course. They also attend a weekly meeting on teaching methods. (This course does not count toward minor or major.) May be repeated for credit, up to a maximum of four units. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of instructor, advanced standing.

LIGN 197. Linguistics Internship (2 or 4)
The student will undertake a program of practical research in a supervised work environment. Topics to be researched may vary, but in each case the course will provide skills for carrying out these studies. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

LIGN 199. Independent Study in Linguistics (2 or 4)
The student undertakes a program of research or advanced reading in linguistics under the supervision of a faculty member of the Department of Linguistics. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of instructor. May be repeated for credit.

LIGN 199H. Honors Independent Study in Linguistics (4)
The student undertakes a program of research and advanced reading in linguistics under the supervision of a faculty member in the Department of Linguistics. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: admission to Honors Program.

LIGN 3. Language as a Social and Cultural Phenomenon (4)
The role of language in thought, myth, ritual, advertising, politics, and the law. Language variation, change, and loss; multilingualism, pidginization and creolization; language planning, standardization, and prescriptivism; writing systems. Prerequisites: none.

LIGN 4. Language as a Cognitive System (4)
Fundamental issues in language and cognition. Differences between animal communication, sign systems, and human language; origins and evolution of language; neural basis of language; language acquisition in children and adults. Prerequisites: none.

LIGN 5. The Linguistics of Invented Languages (4)
Introduction to the study of language through the investigation of invented languages, whether conscious (Elvish, Klingon, Esperanto) or unconscious (creoles, twin/sibling languages). Students will participate in the invention of a language fragment. Topics discussed include language structure, history, culture, and writing systems. Prerequisites: none.

LIGN 6. Computers and Language (4)
Computers and “virtual assistants” are increasingly expected to understand, process, and interact with us using natural human language. This course will focus on the difficult computational and linguistic problems that working with natural language presents; and learn to implement some of the basic computational techniques used to model, process, and produce human language in Python.

LIGN 7. Sign Languages and Their Cultures (4)
Deaf history since the eighteenth century. The structure of American Sign Language and comparison with oral languages. ASL poetry and narrative and Deaf people’s system of cultural knowledge. Basic questions concerning the nature of language and its relation to culture. Prerequisites: none. Satisfies DEI requirement.

LIGN 8. Languages and Cultures in America (4)
Language in American culture and society. Standard and nonstandard English in school, media, pop culture, politics; bilingualism and education; cultural perception of language issues over time; languages and cultures in the “melting pot,” including Native American, Hispanic, African American, Deaf. Prerequisites: none. Satisfies DEI requirement.

LIGN 9GS. Sign Languages and Deaf Culture in the U.S. and France
This course explores and compares the use of sign language and its role in the cultures of deaf people in the U.S. and France. Through signed discussion and viewing language samples, students become acquainted with how introductions, descriptions, numbers, fingerspelling, and more are commonly communicated in the two countries and gain practical experience in signing both ASL and Langue des Signes Francaise (LSF). Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: student must apply and be accepted to the global seminars program.

LIGN 17. Making and Breaking Codes (4)
A rigorous analysis of symbolic systems and their interpretations. Students will learn to encode and decode information using progressively more sophisticated methods; topics covered include ancient and modern phonetic writing systems, hieroglyphics, computer languages, and ciphers (secret codes). Prerequisites: none.

LIGN 42. The Linguistics of Memes (4)
A great meme can perfectly capture your feelings, sum up a situation, leave you laughing, or just add a bit of spice to life. In this course, we’ll look at memes as an aspect of modern communication, discussing the concept of a “meme,” the life cycle of a meme, the social nature of memes, and more, all explored using tools and concepts from language and the field of linguistics. This study will show that memes aren’t just silliness, but a rich communicative medium for a modern multimedia era.

LIGN 87. First-year Student Seminar (1)
The First-year Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year seminars can be offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter.

LTAF 110. African Oral Literature (4)
Survey of various genres of African and oral literary traditions. Oral narrative genres, investigation of proverb, riddle, praise poetry, and epic. Development and use of a methodology to analyze aspects of performance, composition, and education in oral traditional systems.

LTAF 120. Literature and Film of Modern Africa (4)
This course traces the rise of modern literature in traditional African societies disrupted by the colonial and neocolonial experience. Contemporary films by African and Western artists will provide an additional insight into the complex social self-images of the continent. Students may not receive credit for both LTAF 120 and LTAF 120GS.

LTAF 120GS. Literature and Film of Modern Africa (4)
This course traces the rise of modern literature in traditional African societies disrupted by the colonial and neo-colonial experience. Contemporary films by African and western artists will provide additional insight into the complex social self-images of the continent. Department approval required. Students must apply for and be accepted into the Global Seminars Program. Program or materials fees may apply. Students may not receive credit for both LTAF 120 and LTAF 120GS.

LTAM 87. First-year Student Seminar (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students.

LTAM 100. Latino/a Cultures in the United States (4)
An introductory historical and cultural overview of the various Latino/a populations in the United States with a study of representative cultural texts.

LTAM 105. Gender and Sexuality in Latino/a-Chicano/a Cultural Production (4)
A study of the construction of differences in gender and sexual orientation in Latino/a-Chicano/a literature and other cultural production with an emphasis on examining various theoretical/ideological perspectives on these issues. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary.

LTAM 107. Comparative Latino/a and US Ethnic Cultures (4)
A comparative and intersecting study of Latino/a and other US ethnic cultures. Literary texts will be viewed as “windows” into real time and spaces where cultures meet and mix. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary.

LTAM 108. Chicano/a and Latino/a Cultures: Intellectual and Political Traditions (4)
The course will center on Chicano/a-Latino/a writers and movements of literary, intellectual, cultural, or political significance. Texts may be read in the original language or in English. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary.

LTAM 110. Latin American Literature in Translation (4)
Reading of representative works in Latin American literature with a view to literary analysis (form, theme, meaning), the developmental processes of the literature, and the many contexts: historical, social, cultural. Texts may be read in English. LTAM 110 and LTAM 110GS may be taken for credit for a combined total of three times.

LTAM 111. Comparative Caribbean Discourse (4)
Comparative survey of Caribbean literatures from the Spanish, French, English, and Dutch Caribbean. Literary texts trace historical paradigms including the development of plantation slavery, emancipation, the quest for nationhood, migration, and transnational identities. Films and music may complement discussion.

LTAM 120. Ecocultural Narratives from Latin America (4)
This class examines different narratives of the environment from Latin America. Students are exposed to a variety of cultural sources (film, literature, orality) that question the Western divide between culture and nature, and between humans and non-humans. Particular emphasis will be paid to indigenous and Afro-Latin American ways of understanding nature, culture, and knowledge.

LTAM 140. Topics in Culture and Politics (4)
Study of the relationships between cultural production (literature, film, popular culture), social change, and political conflict, covering topics such as colonialism, imperialism, modernization, social movements, dictatorship, and revolution. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTCH 101. Readings in Contemporary Chinese Literature (4)
Intended for students who have the competence to read contemporary Chinese texts, poetry, short stories, and criticism in vernacular Chinese. May be taken for credit up to four times as topics vary.

LTCS 50. Introduction to Cultural Studies (4)
An introduction to cultural studies with a focus on the following areas: literary and historical studies, popular culture, women’s studies, ethnic studies, science studies, and gay/lesbian studies. Particular emphasis on the question of “cultural practices” and their social and political conditions and effects.

LTCS 52. Topics in Cultural Studies (4)
This course is designed to complement LTCS 50, Introduction to Cultural Studies. In this course, cultural studies methods are further introduced and applied to various concrete topics in order to illustrate the practical analysis of culture and cultural forms.

LTCS 87. First-year Student Seminar (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students. Prerequisites: none.

LTCS 100. Theories and Methods in Cultural Studies (4)
Reading in some of the major theoretical texts that have framed work in cultural studies, with particular emphasis on those drawn from critical theory, studies in colonialism, cultural anthropology, feminism, semiotics, gay/lesbian studies, historicism, and psychoanalytic theory.

LTCS 102. Practicing Cultural Studies (4)
Survey and application of methods central to cultural studies as a critical social practice, examining the relationship between cultural studies and social transformation. Students will study varieties of material culture, and experiment with techniques of reading, interpretation, and intervention.

LTCS 108. Gender, Race, and Artificial Intelligence (4)
This course explores the idea of artificial intelligence in both art and science, its relation to the quest to identify what makes us human, and the roles gender and race have played in both. Students may not receive credit for CGS 108 and LTCS 108.

LTCS 110. Popular Culture (4)
A reading of recent theory on popular culture and a study of particular texts dealing with popular cultural practices, both contemporary and noncontemporary, as sites of conflict and struggle. LTCS 110 and LTCS 110GS may be taken for credit for a combined total of three times.

LTCS 110GS. Popular Culture (4)
A reading of recent theories on popular culture and a study of particular texts dealing with popular cultural practices, both contemporary and noncontemporary, as sites of conflict and struggle. Students must apply and be accepted to the Global Seminars Program. Program or materials fees may apply. LTCS 110 and LTCS 110GS may be taken for credit for a combined total of three times.

LTCS 111. Special Topics in Popular Culture in Historical Context (4)
Exploration of forms of popular culture in different historical and geographical contexts. Topics may include folklore, dime novels and other types of popular literature, racial performances, popular religions, theatrical melodrama, photojournalism, and early film. LTCS 111 and LTCS 111GS may be taken for credit for a combined total of three times.

LTCS 111GS. Special Topics in Popular Culture in Historical Context (4)
Exploration of forms of popular culture in different historical and geographical contexts. Topics may include folklore, dime novels and other types of popular literature, racial performances, popular religions, theatrical melodrama, photojournalism, and early film. Students must apply and be accepted to the Global Seminars Program. Program or materials fees may apply. LTCS 111 and LTCS 111GS may be taken for credit for a combined total of three times.

LTCS 119. Asian American Film and Media (4)
(Cross-listed with CGS 119.) The course explores the politics of pleasure in relation to the production, reception, and performance of Asian American identities in the mass media of film, video, and the internet. The course considers how the “deviant” sexuality of Asian Americans (e.g., hypersexual women and emasculated men) does more than uniformly harm and subjugate Asian American subjects. The texts explored alternate between those produced by majoritarian culture and the interventions made by Asian American filmmakers. Students may not receive credit for LTCS 119 and CGS 119.

LTCS 120. Historical Perspectives on Culture (4)
The course will explore the relation among cultural production, institutions, history, and ideology during selected historical periods. In considering different kinds of texts, relations of power and knowledge at different historical moments will be discussed. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTCS 125. Cultural Perspectives on Immigration and Citizenship (4)
Introduction to the studies of cultural dimensions of immigration and citizenship. Examines the diverse cultural texts—literature, law, film, music, the televisual images, etc.—that both shape and are shaped by immigration and the idea of citizenship in different national and historical contexts. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary.

LTCS 130. Gender, Race/Ethnicity, Class, and Culture (4)
The course will focus on the representation of gender, ethnicity, and class in cultural production in view of various contemporary theories of race, sex, and class. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTCS 131. Topics in Queer Cultures/Queer Subcultures (4)
This course examines the intersection of sex, sexuality, and popular culture by looking at the history of popular representations of queer sexuality and their relation to political movements for gay and lesbian rights. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTCS 132. Special Topics in Social Identities and the Media (4)
A study of media representation and various aspects of identity, such as gender, sexuality, race, ethnicity, social class, culture, and geopolitical location. Students will consider the various media of film, television, alternative video, advertising, music, and the internet. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTCS 133. Globalization and Culture (4)
Studies of cultural dimensions of immigration and citizenship. This course examines the diverse cultural texts—literature, law, film, music, the televisual images, etc., that both shape and are shaped by immigration and the idea of citizenship in different national and historical contexts. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary.

LTCS 134. Culture and Revolution (4)
This course examines the cultural practices of revolutionary societies from the French Revolution to present time. It focuses on China, Cuba, Russia, and Iran and explores how various cultural practices are produced in the course of building revolutionary societies.

LTCS 141. Special Topics in Race and Empire (4)
The role of race and culture within the history of empires; may select a single empire for consideration, such as France, Britain, United States, or Japan, or choose to examine the role of race and culture in comparative histories of colonialism. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTCS 150. Topics in Cultural Studies (4)
The course will examine one or more forms of cultural production or cultural practice from a variety of theoretical and historical perspectives. Topics may include contemporary debates on culture, genres of popular music/fiction/film, AIDS and culture, the history of sexuality, subcultural styles, etc. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTCS 155. Health, Illness, and Global Culture (4)
A medical humanities course that examines compelling written and cinematic accounts of health issues confronting contemporary societies such as environmental pollution, contaminated food supply, recreational drug use, HIV/AIDS, cancer, chronic conditions (allergies, diabetes, obesity, arthritis), famine, natural disasters, and war. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary.

LTCS 165. Special Topics: The Politics of Food (4)
This course will examine the representation and politics of food in literary and other cultural texts. Topics may include food and poverty, the fast food industry, controversies about seed, sustainable food production, myths about hunger, eating and epistemology, aesthetics, etc. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTCS 170. Visual Culture (4)
The course will focus on visual practices and discourses in their intersection and overlap, from traditional media, print, and photography to film, video, TV, computers, medical scanners, and the internet. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTCS 172. Special Topics in Screening Race/Ethnicity, Gender and Sexuality (4)
Exploring both Hollywood and international filmmaking, an exploration of screen representations with attention to race/ethnicity, gender, and sexuality in different historical and linguistic contexts. Historical periods may extend from silent, through wartime and cold war, to contemporary era of globalization. LTCS 172 and LTCS 172GS may be taken for credit for a combined total of three times.

LTCS 173. Topics in Violence and Visual Culture (4)
This course focuses on the critical study of representations of violence, such as war, genocide, sexual violence, and crime, across a range of media, including literature, film, photography, and other forms of visual culture. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTCS 180. Programming for the Humanities (4)
Introduction to a script programming language (like Python + NLTK or R) and its usages in the processing of literary and historical digital corpora.

LTCS 198. Directed Group Study (4)
Directed group research, under the guidance of a member of the faculty, in an area not covered in courses currently offered by the department. May be taken for credit up to three times. (P/NP only.) Prerequisites: permission of the department.

LTCS 199. Special Studies (2 or 4)
Individual reading in an area not covered in courses currently offered by the department. May be taken for credit up to three times. (P/NP only.) Prerequisites: permission of the department.

LTEA 100A. Classical Chinese Poetry in Translation (4)
A survey of different genres of traditional Chinese poetry from various periods. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEA 100B. Modern Chinese Poetry in Translation (4)
A survey of Chinese poetry written in the vernacular from 1918 to 1949. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEA 100C. Contemporary Chinese Poetry in Translation (4)
A survey of Chinese poetic development from 1949 to the present. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEA 110A. Classical Chinese Fiction in Translation (4)
The course will focus on a few representative masterpieces of Chinese literature in its classical age, with emphasis on the formal conventions and the social or intellectual presuppositions that are indispensable to their understanding. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEA 110B. Modern Chinese Fiction in Translation (4)
A survey of representative works of the modern period from 1919 to 1949. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEA 110C. Contemporary Chinese Fiction in Translation (4)
An introductory survey of representative texts produced after 1949 with particular emphasis on the social, cultural, and political changes. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEA 120A. Chinese Films (4)
A survey of representative films from different periods of Chinese cinematic development. Priority may be given to Chinese studies majors and literature majors. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEA 120B. Taiwan Films (4)
A survey of “New Taiwan Cinema” of the eighties and nineties. Priority may be given to Chinese studies majors and literature majors. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEA 120C. Hong Kong Films (4)
An examination of representative works of different film genres from Hong Kong. Priority may be given to Chinese studies majors and literature majors. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEA 132. Later Japanese Literature in Translation (4)
An introduction to later Japanese (kogo) literature in translation. Will focus on several “modern” works, placing their forms in the historical context. No knowledge of Japanese required. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEA 138. Japanese Films (4)
An introduction to Japanese films. Attention given to representative Japanese directors (e.g., Ozu), form (e.g., anime), genre (e.g., feminist revenge horror), or historical context in which films are produced. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEA 138GS. Japanese Films (4)
An introduction to Japanese films. Attention given to representative Japanese directors (e.g., Ozu), form (e.g., anime), genre (e.g., feminist revenge horror), or historical context in which films are produced. Priority may be given to Japanese studies majors and literature majors. Students must submit applications to the International Center Program Abroad Office and be accepted into the Global Seminar Program. Program or materials fees may apply.

LTEA 140. Modern Korean Literature in Translation from Colonial Period (4)
A survey of modern Korean prose fiction and poetry from the colonial period. Exploration of major issues such as Japanese colonization, rise of left-wing and right-wing nationalisms, construction of national culture, and relations between tradition and modernity.

LTEA 141. Modern Korean Literature in Translation from 1945 to Present (4)
A survey of modern Korean prose fiction and poetry from 1945 to the 1990s. Examination of literary representations of national division, the Korean War, accelerated industrialization, authoritarian rule, and the labor/agrarian movements.

LTEA 142. Korean Film, Literature, and Popular Culture (4)
A study of modern Korean society and its major historical issues as represented in film, literature, and other popular cultural media such as TV and music video. We will explore additional issues such as cinematic adaptations of prose fiction, fluid distinctions between popular literature and “serious” literature, and the role of mass media under authoritarian rule. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary.

LTEA 143. Gender and Sexuality in Korean Literature and Culture (4)
A study of constructions of gender and sexuality in premodern and modern Korean societies. We will discuss literary works as well as historical and ethnographic works on gender relations, representations of masculinity and femininity, and changing roles of men and women in work and family. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary.

LTEA 144. Korean American Literature and Other Literatures of Korean Diaspora (4)
An examination of the experiences of the Korean diaspora linked to the historical contexts of modern Korea, Japan, the United States, and other countries. We will focus on literature both about Korea and the Korean immigrant experience written in the United States but will also read from and about other Korean diasporic contexts. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary.

LTEA 151. Readings in Tagalog Literature and Culture I (4)
Course will concentrate on selections of literature, history, and cultural texts (painting, drama, religious artifacts) of the 1896 Philippine revolution and the succeeding US takeover of the Philippines. Intermediate fluency in speaking, reading, and writing Tagalog. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEA 152B. Topics in Filipino Literature and Culture (World War II–Present) (4)
Surveys the authors, intellectual currents, and cultural politics of Filipino culture from World War II to the present. Topics may include the dual lingua franca, the birth of “Filipino American” literature, the culture of dictatorship, and new approaches to narrative. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEA 198. Directed Group Study (4)
Research seminars and research, under the direction of a faculty member. May be taken for credit up to three times. (P/NP grades only)

LTEA 199. Special Studies (2 or 4)
Tutorial; individual guided reading in areas of literature not normally covered in courses. May be taken for credit up to three times. (P/NP grades only.)

LTEN 21. Introduction to the Literature of the British Isles: Pre-1660 (4)
An introduction to the literatures written in English in Britain before 1660, with a focus on the interaction of text and history.

LTEN 22. Introduction to the Literature of the British Isles: 1660–1832 (4)
An introduction to the literatures written in English in Britain and Ireland between 1660 and 1832, with a focus on the interaction of text and history.

LTEN 23. Introduction to the Literature of the British Isles: 1832–Present (4)
An introduction to the literatures written in English in Britain, Ireland, and the British Empire (and the former British Empire) from 1832 to the present, with a focus on the interaction of text and history.

LTEN 25. Introduction to the Literature of the United States, Beginnings to 1865 (4)
An introduction to the literatures written in English in the United States from the beginnings to 1865, with a focus on the interaction of text and history.

LTEN 26. Introduction to the Literature of the United States, 1865 to the Present (4)
An introduction to the literatures written in English in the United States from 1865 to the present, with a focus on the interaction of text and history.

LTEN 27. Introduction to African American Literature (4)
A lecture discussion course that examines a major topic or theme in African American literature as it is developed over time and across the literary genres of fiction, poetry, and belles lettres. A particular emphasis of the course is how African American writers have adhered to or departed from conventional definitions of genre.

LTEN 28. Introduction to Asian American Literature (4)
This course provides an introduction to the study of the history, communities, and cultures of different Asian American people in the United States. Students will examine different articulations, genres, conflicts, narrative forms, and characterizations of the varied Asian experience.

LTEN 29. Introduction to Chicano Literature (4)
This course provides an introduction to the literary production of the population of Mexican origin in the United States. Students will examine a variety of texts dealing with the historical (social, economic, and political) experiences of this heterogeneous population.

LTEN 30. Poetry for Physicists (4)
Physicists have spoken of the beauty of equations. The poet John Keats wrote, “Beauty is truth, truth beauty . . .” What did they mean? Students will consider such questions while reading relevant essays and poems. Requirements include one creative exercise or presentation. Students may not receive credit for both LTEN 30 and PHYS 30. Prerequisites: CAT 2 and 3 or DOC 2 and 3 or HUM 1 and 2 or MCWP 40 and 50 or MMW 12 and 13 or WARR 11A-B or WCWP 10A-B. Completion of college writing requirement.

LTEN 31. Introduction to Indigenous Literature (4)
This course provides an introduction to the study of the history, politics, and cultures of tribal nations in the United States and other indigenous peoples across the hemisphere and Oceania impacted by US colonial projects. Students will examine a variety of texts, genres, and periods dealing with the historical (social, economic, and political) experiences of indigenous peoples impacted by US colonization and expansion.

LTEN 87. First-year Student Seminar (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students. Prerequisites: none.

LTEN 107. Chaucer (4)
A study of Chaucer’s poetic development, beginning with The Book of the Duchess and The Parliament of Fowls, including Troilus and Criseyde, and concluding with substantial selections from The Canterbury Tales.

LTEN 110. Topics: The Renaissance (4)
Major literary works of the Renaissance, an exciting period of social and cultural transformation in England as elsewhere in Europe. Topics may include a central theme (e.g., humanism, reformation, revolution), a genre (e.g., pastoral), or comparison with other arts and sciences. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 112. Shakespeare I: The Elizabethan Period (4)
A lecture/discussion course exploring the development of Shakespeare’s dramatic powers in comedy, history, and tragedy, from the early plays to the middle of his career. Dramatic forms, themes, characters, and styles will be studied in the contexts of Shakespeare’s theatre and his society.

LTEN 113. Shakespeare II: The Jacobean Period (4)
A lecture/discussion course exploring the rich and varied achievements of Shakespeare’s later plays, including the major tragedies and late romances. Dramatic forms, themes, characters, and styles will be studied in the contexts of Shakespeare’s theatre and his society.

LTEN 114. Shakespeare III: Text, Stage, and Film (4)
Close study of five Shakespeare plays. Form, theme, action, and language will be studies in the context of Shakespeare’s theatre and society. We will view film and video versions of these plays, focusing on the critical implications of transposing plays to film.

LTEN 117. Topics: The Seventeenth Century (4)
Selected topics in English literature during a period of social change, religious controversy, emergence of the New Science, and the English Civil War. The course may be devoted to one or more major authors, a particular genre, or a political, social, or literary issue. Readings chosen from writers including Jonson, Donne, Bacon, Milton, Marvell, and Dryden, among others. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 120. Topics: The Eighteenth Century (4)
Selected topics in English literature and culture during the “long eighteenth century,” the period between 1660 and 1830. Topics might include satiric writing, the theatre world, radical/reformist discourse, and the emergence of the professional woman writer. Writers include Behn, Wycherley, Congreve, Pope, Swift, Johnson, Wollstonecraft. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 124. Topics: The Nineteenth Century (4)
Selected topics in nineteenth-century British literature and culture, drawing on the Romantic and/or Victorian periods (e.g., relationships between literature and imperialism, social and political debate, gender issues, religion, or science). The course could focus solely on topics within either the Romantic or Victorian periods or comprehend writing in both periods. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 125. Romantic Poetry (4)
Studies in Romantic poetry, covering the first generation (Blake, Wordsworth, Coleridge and their contemporaries) and/or the second generation (Shelley, Keats, Byron and their contemporaries) of Romantic poets. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 127. Victorian Poetry (4)
Studies in the poetry of the Victorian age including writers such as Tennyson, the Brownings, Arnold, Rosetti, Hopkins, and their contemporaries. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 128. British and Irish Poetry: 1900 to Present (4)
Selected topics in British and Irish poetry in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. Topics may include modernism, movement poetry, the British poetry revival, and postcolonial and Black British poetry. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 130. Modern British Literature (4)
Selected topics concerned with modern British literature; study of various authors, issues, and trends in literatures of the British Isles from the mid-1850s through the present day. LTEN 130 and LTEN 130GS may be taken for credit for a combined total of three times.

LTEN 130GS. Modern British Literature (4)
Selected topics concerned with modern British literature; study of various authors, issues, and trends in literatures of the British Isles from the mid-1850s through the present day. Department approval required. Students must apply for and be accepted into the Global Seminars Program. Program or materials fees may apply. LTEN 130GS and LTEN 130 may be taken for credit for a combined total of three times.

LTEN 132. Modern Irish Literature (4)
The Irish Revival and its aftermath: Yeats, Synge, O’Casey, Joyce, Beckett, and their contemporaries. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 138. The British Novel: 1680–1790 (4)
Studies in the early period of the development of the English novel. Writers may include Behn, Defoe, Richardson, and Burney. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 140. The British Novel: 1790–1830 (4)
Studies in the early nineteenth-century novel, such as the novels of Austen, Wollstonecraft and/or Shelly, the Gothic novel, radical fiction of the 1790s. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 142. The British Novel: 1830–1890 (4)
Covers the early and midperiod Victorian novel, including such novelists as Dickens, the Brontes, Thackery, Eliot and their contemporaries. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 144. The British Novel: 1890 to Present (4)
Selected topics in the British novel from the late Victorian novel to present-day Black British fiction. Topics include colonial and postcolonial writing, modernism, and post-WWII fiction. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 148. Genres in English and American Literature (4)
An examination of one or more genres in English and/or American literature, for example, satire, science fiction, autobiography, comic drama. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 149. Topics: English-Language Literature (4)
A consideration of one of the themes that recur in many periods and cultural contexts of English-language literatures for instance, love, politics, identity, gender, race, class, or religion. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 150. Gender, Text, and Culture (4)
This course studies representations of the sexes and of their interrelationship in various forms of English-language writing produced during different phases of English history. Emphasis will be placed upon connections of gender and of literature to other modes of social belief, experience, and practice. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 152. The Origins of American Literature (4)
Studies in American written and oral literatures from the early colonial to the early national period (1620–1830), with emphasis on the thrust and continuity of American culture, social and intellectual, through the beginnings of major American writing in the first quarter of the nineteenth century. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 153. The Revolutionary War and the Early National Period in US Literature (4)
A critical examination of new texts of various kinds—written and oral, political, philosophical, and literary—functioned in the construction of the political body of the new American republic and the self-conception of its citizens. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 154. The American Renaissance (4)
A study of some of the chief works, and the linguistic, philosophical, and historical attitudes informing them, produced by such authors as Emerson, Hawthorne, Melville, Dickinson, and Whitman during the period 1836–1865, when the role of American writing in the national culture becomes an overriding concern. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 155. Interactions between American Literature and the Visual Arts (4)
An exploration of the connections between the work of individual writers, or movements, and the work of artists in various visual media. The writers studied are always American; the artists or art movements may represent non-American influences on these American writers. Topics could include portraiture and self-portraiture in visual arts and literature, or nature writing and landscape painting. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 156. American Literature from the Civil War to World War I (4)
A critical examination of works by such authors as Mark Twain, Henry James, Kate Chopin, and Edith Wharton, who were writing in an age when the frontier was conquered and American society began to experience massive industrialization and urbanization. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 157. Captivity and Prison Narratives (4)
A comparative study of narratives of experiences of incarceration, whether through acts of war, commerce, education, crime, or state-sponsored states of exception. Emphasis given to intercultural encounters, identity formation within these encounters, and state uses of and justifications for incarceration. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 158. Modern American Literature (4)
A critical examination of American literature in several genres and other facets of US culture produced between the turn of the century and World War II. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 159. Contemporary American Literature (4)
A critical examination of American literature in several genres and other facets of US culture produced since World War II. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 169. Topics in Latino/a Literature (4)
The course will focus on selected topics in nineteenth-, twentieth-, and twenty-first-century Latino/a literature and culture in the United States from a sociohistorical perspective. Topics may include issues of gender, sexuality, race, ethnicity, class, social struggle, and political resistance. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 171. Comparative Issues in Latino/a Immigration in US Literature (4)
A critical examination of the configuration of Latino/a immigration in US literary and visual culture. The course will focus on Latino immigrant groups, analyzing their relocation in the United States from a theoretical, historical, and social perspective. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 172. American Poetry II—Whitman through the Modernists (4)
Reading and interpretation of American poets from Whitman through the principal modernists—Pound, H.D., Eliot, Moore, Stevens, and others. Lectures will set the appropriate context in sociocultural and literary history.

LTEN 174. American Fiction II—Since Middle James (4)
Reading and interpretation of American fiction from Henry James through the principal modernists—Fitzgerald, Stein, Welty, Faulkner, and others. Lectures will set the appropriate context.

LTEN 175A. New American Fiction—Post-World War II to the Present (4)
Reading and interpretation of American fiction from the mid-1940s to the present. Lectures will set the appropriate context in sociocultural and literary history. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 175B. New American Poetry—Post-World War II to the Present (4)
Reading and interpretation of American poets whose work has made its major impact since the last war, for instance Charles Olson, Robert Creeley, Denise Levertov, Adrienne Rich, Allen Ginsberg, Frank O’Hara, and John Ashbery. Lectures will set the appropriate context in sociocultural and literary history. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 176. Major American Writers (4)
A study in depth of the works of major American writers. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 178. Comparative Ethnic Literature (4)
A lecture-discussion course that juxtaposes the experience of two or more US ethnic groups and examines their relationship with the dominant culture. Students will analyze a variety of texts representing the history of ethnicity in this country. Topics will vary. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 179. Topics: Arab/Muslim American Identity and Culture (4)
This class explores (self) representations of Muslim and Arab Americans in US popular culture with a focus on the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. Topics include the racing of religion, “the war on terror” in the media, feminism and Islam, immigration, race, and citizenship. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 180. Chicano Literature in English (4)
Introduction to the literature in English by the Chicano population, the men and women of Mexican descent who live and write in the United States. Primary focus on the contemporary period.

LTEN 181. Asian American Literature (4)
Selected topics in the literature by men and women of Asian descent who live and write in the United States. LTEN 181 and ETHN 124 may be taken for credit for a combined total of two times.

LTEN 182. Diaspora, Race, and Iranian American Literature (4)
Examines the Iranian American literary and visual cultures, focusing on intersections of class, gender, and race in the context of diaspora everyday life. Renumbered from LTAM 120.

LTEN 183. African American Prose (4)
Analysis and discussion of the novel, the personal narrative, and other prose genres, with particular emphasis on the developing characteristics of African American narrative and the cultural and social circumstances that influence their development. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 185. Themes in African American Literature (4)
An intensive examination of a characteristic theme, special issue, or period in African American literature. May be taken for credit up to three times. Students may receive a combined total of twelve units for LTEN 185, LTEN 185GS, and ETHN 174.

LTEN 186. Literature of the Harlem Renaissance (4)
The Harlem Renaissance (1917–39) focuses on the emergence of the “New Negro” and the impact of this concept on black literature, art, and music. Writers studied include Claude McKay, Zora N. Hurston, and Langston Hughes. Special emphasis on new themes and forms.

LTEN 188. Contemporary Caribbean Literature (4)
This course will focus on contemporary literature of the English-speaking Caribbean. The parallels and contrasts of this Third World literature with those of the Spanish- and French-speaking Caribbean will also be explored.

LTEN 189. Twentieth-Century Postcolonial Literatures (4)
The impact of British colonialism, national independence movements, postcolonial cultural trends, and women’s movements on the global production of literary texts in English. Course is organized by topic or geographical/historical location. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEN 192. Senior Seminar in Literatures in English (1)
The Senior Seminar Program is designed to allow senior undergraduates to meet with faculty members in a small group setting to explore an intellectual topic in literature (at the upper-division level). Senior Seminars may be offered in all campus departments. Topics will vary from quarter to quarter. Senior Seminars may be taken for credit up to four times, with a change in topic, and permission of the department. Enrollment is limited to twenty students, with preference given to seniors. Prerequisites: department stamp and/or consent of instructor.

LTEN 196. Honors Thesis in Literatures in English (4)
Senior thesis research and writing for students who have been accepted for the Literature Honors Program and who have completed LTWL 191. Oral exam. Prerequisites: department approval.

LTEN 198. Directed Group Study in English Literature (4)
Research seminars and research, under the direction of a member of the staff. May be taken for credit up to nine times. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: department approval.

LTEN 199. Special Studies in English Literature (2 or 4)
Tutorial; individual guided reading in an area not normally covered in courses. May be taken for credit up to four times. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: department approval.

LTEU 87. First-year Student Seminar (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students.

LTEU 100. Introduction to Italian Literature (4)
Introduction to representative Italian authors from Dante through the twenty-first century. May be taken up to three times for credit as topics vary.

LTEU 105. Medieval Studies (4)
Studies in medieval culture and thought with focus on the “three crowns” of Italian literature: Dante, Boccaccio, or Petrarca. May be taken for credit up to two times. Students may receive a combined total of eight units for LTEU 105 and LTIT 115.

LTEU 109. Studies in Eighteenth-Century European Literature (4)
Topics to be considered include the age of sensibility, enlightenment, neoclassicism. Attention given to historical and cultural contexts.

LTEU 110. European Romanticism (4)
Attention given to historical and cultural contexts. Topics to be considered include the concept of nature, the reaction to science, the role of the imagination.

LTEU 111. European Realism (4)
This course focuses on nineteenth-century European realism in historical and cultural context. Topics include definitions of realism, the impact of urbanization and industrialization on literary forms and themes, and relations between realism in literature and the visual arts. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEU 130. German Literature in Translation (4)
One or more aspects of German literature, such as major authors, the contemporary novel, nineteenth-century poetry, German expressionism. Texts may be read in English or the original language. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEU 137. Seminars in German Culture (4)
These seminars are devoted to a variety of special topics, including the works of single authors, genre studies, problems in literary history, relations between literature and the history of ideas, literary criticism, literature and society, and the like. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary.

LTEU 140. Italian Literature in Translation (4)
One or more periods and authors in Italian literature. Texts will be read in English. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEU 141. French Literature in English Translation (4)
Study of works of French literature of any period in English translation. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEU 146. Studies in Modern Italian Prose (4)
A study of the chief modern Italian prosatori, including D’Annunzio, Calvino, Pavese, and Pasolini. May be taken for credit up to three times. Students may receive a combined total of twelve units for LTEU 146 and LTIT 137.

LTEU 150A. Survey of Russian and Soviet Literature in Translation, 1800–1860 (4)
A study of literary works from 1800–1860. Students may not receive credit for both LTEU 150A and LTRU 110A.

LTEU 150B. Survey of Russian and Soviet Literature in Translation, 1860–1917 (4)
A study of literary works from 1860–1917. Students may not receive credit for both LTEU 150B and LTRU 110B.

LTEU 150C. Survey of Russian and Soviet Literature in Translation, 1917–Present (4)
A study of literary works from 1917 to the present. Students may not receive credit for both LTEU 150C and LTRU 110C.

LTEU 153GS. Environmental Studies in Russia: Lake Baikal (4)
Explores interface between literature, science, and media in context of Russia’s Lake Baikal, a focal point for climate change concerns. Probes physical/biological characteristics, threats to Lake Baikal ecosystem. Analyzes literary representations of Baikal in fiction, poetry, and film, along with journalistic debate on changing ecosystems. Focus on discerning interpretation from alternative fact. Service work, work with Russian specialists. Russian language integrated based on student proficiency. Department approval required. Students must apply and be accepted to the Global Seminars Program. Program or materials fees may apply.

LTEU 154. Russian Culture (4)
An introduction to Russia’s past and present through the cross-disciplinary study of literature, the visual and performing arts, social and political thought, civic rituals, popular entertainments, values and practices from 1825 to the present. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTEU 158. Single Author in Russian Literature in Translation (4)
A study of literary works by a single Russian author. All readings will be in English. LTEU 158 and LTRU 123 may be taken for credit for a combined total of three times as topics vary.

LTFR 2A. Intermediate French I (5)
First course in a three-quarter sequence designed to prepare students for upper-division French courses. The course is taught entirely in French and emphasizes the development of reading ability, listening comprehension, and conversational and writing skills. Basic techniques of literary analysis. Prerequisites: LIFR 1C/CX or its equivalent, score of 3 on French language AP exam or consent of instructor.

LTFR 2B. Intermediate French II (5)
Second course in a three-quarter sequence designed to prepare students for upper-division French courses. The course is taught entirely in French and emphasizes the development of reading ability, listening comprehension, and conversational and writing skills. Basic techniques of literary analysis. Prerequisites: LTFR 2A or its equivalent, score of 4 on French language or score of 3 on French literature AP exams or consent of instructor.

LTFR 2C. Intermediate French III: Composition and Cultural Contexts (4)
Designed to improve writing and conversational skills. Develop written expression in terms of organization or ideas, structure, vocabulary. Grammar review. Discussions of contemporary novel and film. Prerequisites: LTFR 2B or its equivalent, score of 5 on French language or score of 4 on French literature AP exams or consent of instructor.

LTFR 104. Advanced French Reading and Writing (4)
This course will help students transition from lower-division French language courses to upper-division literature courses through close work with original texts to develop comprehension, writing, and analytical skills. May be taken for credit up to three times. Prerequisites: LTFR 2C or consent of instructor.

LTFR 115. Themes in Intellectual and Literary History (4)
Course in a two-quarter sequence designed as an introduction to French literature and literary history. Each quarter will center on a specific theme or problem. It is recommended that majors whose primary literature is French take this sequence as early as possible. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTFR 104.

LTFR 116. Themes in Intellectual and Literary History (4)
Course in a two-quarter sequence designed as an introduction to French literature and literary history. Each quarter will center on a specific theme or problem. It is recommended that majors whose primary literature is French take this sequence as early as possible. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTFR 104.

LTFR 121. The Middle Ages and the Renaissance (4)
Major literary works of the Middle Ages and Renaissance as seen against the historical and intellectual background of the period. Medieval texts in modern French translation. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTFR 104.

LTFR 122. Topics in Seventeenth-Century French Literature (4)
This course will cover major literary works and problems of seventeenth-century French literature. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTFR 104.

LTFR 123. Eighteenth Century (4)
Major literary works and problems of the eighteenth century. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTFR 104.

LTFR 124. Nineteenth Century (4)
Major literary works of the nineteenth century. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTFR 104.

LTFR 125. Twentieth Century (4)
Major literary works and problems of the twentieth century. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTFR 104.

LTFR 141. Topics in Literatures in French (4)
Examines one or more periods, themes, authors, and approaches in French literature. Topics will vary with instructor. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTFR 104.

LTFR 142. Topics in Literary Genres in French (4)
An examination of one or more major or minor genres of French literature: for example, drama, novel, poetry, satire, prose poem, essay. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTFR 104.

LTFR 143. Topics in Major Authors in French (4)
A study in depth of the works of a major French writer. Recommended for students whose primary literature is French. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTFR 104.

LTFR 164. Topics in Modern French Culture (4)
A course on changing topics such as France during the 1960s, contemporary social and cultural structures (the school system, economy, political parties), myths of America in France, etc. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTFR 104.

LTFR 198. Directed Group Study (4)
Research seminars and research, under the direction of a member of the staff. May be taken for credit up to nine times. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: department approval.

LTFR 199. Special Studies (2 or 4)
Tutorial; individual guided reading in areas of French literature not normally covered in courses. May be taken for credit up to four times. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: department approval.

LTGM 2A. Intermediate German I (5)
LTGM 2A follows the basic language sequence of the Department of Linguistics and emphasizes the development of reading ability, listening comprehension, and conversational and writing skills. The course includes grammar review and class discussion of reading and audiovisual materials. Specifically, the course prepares students for LIGM 2B and 2C. Prerequisites: LTGM 1C/1CX or its equivalent or score of 3 on AP German language exam or consent of instructor.

LTGM 2B. Intermediate German II (5)
LTGM 2B is a continuation of LTGM 2A for those students who intend to practice their skills in reading, listening comprehension, and writing on a more advanced level. The literary texts are supplemented by readings from other disciplines as well as audiovisual materials. Prerequisites: LTGM 2A or score of 4 on AP German language exam or consent of instructor.

LTGM 2C. Intermediate German III (4)
A course designed for students who wish to improve their ability to speak and write German. Students will read and discuss a variety of texts and films, and complete the grammar review begun in 2A. 2C emphasizes speaking, writing, and critical thinking, and prepares students for upper-division course work in German. Prerequisites: LTGM 2B or equivalent or score of 5 on AP German language exam or consent of instructor.

LTGM 100. German Studies I: Aesthetic Cultures (4)
This course offers an overview of German aesthetic culture in its various forms (literature, film, art, music, and architecture) and methods of analysis. Materials will explore the diversity of aesthetic production from the eighteenth century to the present.

LTGM 101. German Studies II: National Identities (4)
This course offers an overview of issues in contemporary and historical German cultures. How has national identity been constructed in the past? What does it mean to be a German in the new Europe? Materials include fiction, historical documents, films, and the internet.

LTGM 130. German Literary Prose (4)
The development of major forms and modes of German literary prose. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTGM 132. German Poetry (4)
The development of major forms and modes of German verse. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTGM 134. New German Cinema (4)
A survey of German cinema from the late 1960s to the early 1980s. Focus on films by such directors as Fassbinder, Herzog, Kluge, Schlӧndorff, von Trotta, and Wenders viewed in historical and cultural context. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTGM 190. Seminars in German Culture (4)
These seminars are devoted to a variety of special topics, including the works of single authors, genre studies, problems in literary history, relations between literature and the history of ideas, literary criticism, literature and society, and the like. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary.

LTGM 198. Directed Group Study (4)
Research seminars and research, under the direction of a member of the staff. May be taken for credit up to nine times. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: department approval.

LTGM 199. Special Studies (2 or 4)
Tutorial; individual guided reading in areas of German literature not normally covered in courses. May be taken for credit up to four times. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: department approval.

LTGK 1. Beginning Greek (4)
Study of ancient Greek, including grammar and reading.

LTGK 2. Intermediate Greek (I) (4)
Continuation of study of ancient Greek, including grammar and reading. Prerequisites: LTGK 1 or equivalent.

LTGK 3. Intermediate Greek (II) (4)
Continuation of study of ancient Greek, including grammar and reading of texts. Prerequisites: LTGK 1 and 2 or equivalent.

LTGK 101. Greek Composition (4)
Greek prose composition. Corequisites: student must be concurrently enrolled in upper-division Literature/Greek course numbered 102 or above.

LTGK 102. Greek Poetry (4)
Readings in Greek from ancient Greek poetry. May be taken for credit up to four times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTGK 1, 2, and 3.

LTGK 103. Greek Drama (4)
Readings in Greek from ancient Greek drama. May be taken for credit up to four times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTGK 1, 2, and 3.

LTGK 104. Greek Prose (4)
Readings in Greek from ancient Greek prose. May be taken for credit up to four times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTGK 1, 2, and 3.

LTGK 105. Topics in Greek Literature (4)
Readings in Greek covering specific topics in ancient Greek literature. May be taken for credit up to four times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTGK 1, 2, and 3.

LTGK 198. Directed Group Study (4)
Directed group study in areas of Greek literature not normally covered in courses. May be taken for credit up to four times as topics vary. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: department approval.

LTGK 199. Special Studies (2 or 4)
Tutorial; individual guided reading in an area not normally covered in courses. May be taken for credit up to four times as topics vary. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: department approval.

LTIT 2A. Intermediate Italian I (5)
A second-year course in Italian language and literature. Conversation, composition, grammar review, and an introduction to literary and nonliterary texts. Prerequisites: LTIT 1C or LIIT 1C/1CX or its equivalent or a score of 3 on AP Italian Language and Culture Exam or placement result of 3 or 4 on the Language Placement Exam–Italian or consent of instructor.

LTIT 2B. Intermediate Italian II (5)
Continuation of second-year Italian language and literature. Reading, writing, conversation, grammar review, and an introduction to literary genres and contemporary Italian culture and society. Prerequisites: LTIT 2A or its equivalent, or consent of instructor, or a score of 4 on the AP Italian Language and Culture exam.

LTIT 12AR. Italian for Spanish Speakers I (4)
Introduction to the practice of speaking, reading, and writing Italian with an emphasis on linguistic bridges between Italian and Spanish and cultural bridges between Italian and Spanish and Latin American cultures. Regular comparative analysis and metalinguistic reflection allow heritage and second-language speakers of Spanish to move between the two languages, accelerating the acquisition of competence in Italian while consolidating and strengthening competence in Spanish. This course is a distance education course.

LTIT 12BR. Italian for Spanish Speakers II (4)
Introduction to the practice of speaking, reading, and writing Italian with an emphasis on linguistic bridges between Italian and Spanish and cultural bridges between Italian and Spanish and Latin American cultures. Regular comparative analysis and metalinguistic reflection allow heritage and second-language speakers of Spanish to move between the two languages, accelerating the acquisition of competence in Italian while consolidating and strengthening competence in Spanish. Prerequisites: LTIT 12AR. This course is a distance education course.

LTIT 50. Advanced Italian (4)
This course constitutes the sixth and final quarter of the Italian language sequence. It offers an intensive study of Italian grammar, drills in conversation and composition, and readings in modern Italian literature. Prerequisites: LTIT 2A and 2B, or consent of instructor.

LTIT 100. Introduction to Literatures in Italian (4)
Reading and discussion of selections from representative authors. Review of grammar as needed. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTIT 50 or its equivalent, or consent of instructor, or a score of 5 on the AP Italian Language and Culture exam.

LTIT 115. Medieval Studies (4)
Studies in medieval culture and thought with focus on one of the “three crowns” of Italian literature: Dante, Boccaccio, or Petrarca. May be taken for credit up to two times. Students may receive a combined total of eight units for LTIT 115 and LTEU 105.

LTIT 122. Studies in Modern Italian Culture (4)
Politics, literature, and cultural issues of twentieth-century Italy. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTIT 50.

LTIT 137. Studies in Modern Italian Prose (4)
A study of the chief modern Italian prosatori, including D’Annunzio, Calvino, Pavese, and Pasolini. May be taken for credit up to three times. Students may receive a combined total of twelve units for LTIT 137 and LTEU 146.

LTIT 161. Advanced Stylistics and Conversation (4)
Analysis of Italian essays, journalism, literature. Intensive practice in writing and Italian conversation. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTIT 100 or consent of instructor.

LTIT 192. Senior Seminar in Literatures in Italian (1)
The Senior Seminar Program is designed to allow senior undergraduates to meet with faculty members in a small group setting to explore an intellectual topic in literature (at the upper-division level). Senior Seminars may be offered in all campus departments. Topics will vary from quarter to quarter. Senior Seminars may be taken for credit up to four times, with a change in topic, and permission of the department. Enrollment is limited to twenty students, with preference given to seniors. Prerequisites: department stamp and/or consent of instructor.

LTIT 198. Directed Group Study (4)
Directed group study in areas of Italian literature not normally covered in courses. May be taken for credit up to four times as topics vary. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: department approval.

LTIT 199. Special Studies (2 or 4)
Tutorial; individual guided reading in areas of Italian literature not normally covered in courses. May be taken for credit up to four times as topics vary. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: department approval.

LTKO 1A. Beginning Korean: First Year I (5)
Students develop beginning-level skills in the Korean language, beginning with an introduction to the writing and sound system. The remainder of the course will focus on basic sentence structures and expressions.

LTKO 1B. Beginning Korean: First Year II (5)
Students develop beginning-level skills in the Korean language, with an introduction to the writing and sound system. The remainder of the course will focus on basic sentence structures and expressions. Prerequisites: LTKO 1A or placement test and consent of instructor.

LTKO 1C. Beginning Korean: First Year III (5)
Students develop beginning-level skills in the Korean language, beginning with an introduction to the writing and sound system. The remainder of the course will focus on basic sentence structures and expressions. Prerequisites: LTKO 1B or placement test and consent of instructor.

LTKO 2A. Intermediate Korean: Second Year I (5)
This course will help students develop intermediate-level skills in the Korean language. Upon completion of this course, students are expected to have good command of Korean in various daily conversational situations. Prerequisites: LTKO 1C or placement test and consent of instructor.

LTKO 2B. Intermediate Korean: Second Year II (5)
This course will help students develop intermediate-level skills in the Korean language. Upon completion of this course, students are expected to have a good command of Korean in various daily conversational situations. Prerequisites: LTKO 2A or placement test and consent of instructor.

LTKO 2C. Intermediate Korean: Second Year III (5)
This course will help students develop intermediate-level skills in the Korean language. Upon completion of this course, students are expected to have good command of Korean in various daily conversational situations. Prerequisites: LTKO 2B or placement test and consent of instructor.

LTKO 130F. Advanced Korean: Third Year I (4)
Students will learn advanced level skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing Korean, and expand their understanding of Korean culture. Topics: living in Korea, popular Korean food, dating culture in Korea, tour sites and regional products, Hallyu—Korean Wave. Students may receive a combined total of twelve units for LTKO 130, LTKO 130F, LTKO 130W, and LTKO 130P. Prerequisites: LTKO 2C or equivalent level of proficiency with consent of instructor.

LTKO 130W. Advanced Korean: Third Year II (4)
Students will learn advanced level skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing Korean, and expand their understanding of Korean culture. Topics: address terms and interpersonal relations, famous Korean people, Seoul—capital city of Korea, South Korea and North Korea, housing in Korea. Students may receive a combined total of twelve units for LTKO 130, LTKO 130F, LTKO 130W, and LTKO 130P. Prerequisites: LTKO 2C or equivalent level of proficiency with consent of instructor.

LTKO 130P. Advanced Korean: Third Year III (4)
Students will learn advanced level skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing Korean, and expand their understanding of Korean culture. Topics: customs and superstitions, Korean folktales and proverbs, Korean culture of community, Korea during the Japanese colonial period, Korea and Korean. Students may receive a combined total of twelve units for LTKO 130, LTKO 130F, LTKO 130W, and LTKO 130P. Prerequisites: LTKO 2C or equivalent level of proficiency with consent of instructor.

LTKO 135. Readings in Sino-Korean Characters (4)
Students in this course will learn advanced and superior level Sino-Korean vocabulary and characters, skills in reading and understanding advanced and superior level Korean reading materials, and expand their understanding of Korean culture. Upon completion of this course, students are expected to have acquired an expanded vocabulary, knowledge of various expressions using Sino-Korean vocabulary and characters. Prerequisites: LTKO 2C or equivalent level of proficiency with consent of instructor.

LTKO 140. Readings in Korean Literature (4)
Readings in Korean literature and culture from colonial period to present. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTKO 130F or LTKO 130W or LTKO 130F or equivalent proficiency with consent of instructor.

LTKO 149. Readings in Korean Language History and Structure (4)
This course is designed to develop cultural understanding and professional/academic level reading skill for students with coverage of materials on Korean language history from the fifteenth century to the present, previous and current writing systems, and Korean language structure. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTKO 130 or equivalent proficiency with consent of instructor.

LTLA 1. Beginning Latin (4)
Study of Latin, including grammar and reading.

LTLA 2. Intermediate Latin (I) (4)
Study of Latin, including grammar and reading. Prerequisites: LTLA 1 or equivalent.

LTLA 3. Intermediate Latin (II) (4)
Study of Latin, including grammar and reading. Prerequisites: LTLA 2 or equivalent.

LTLA 100. Introduction to Latin Literature (4)
Reading and discussion of selections from representative authors of one or more periods. Review of grammar as needed. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTLA 3 or equivalent.

LTLA 102. Latin Poetry (4)
Readings in Latin from Latin poetry. May be taken for credit up to four times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTLA 1, 2, and 3.

LTLA 103. Latin Drama (4)
Readings in Latin from Latin drama. May be taken for credit up to four times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTLA 1, 2, and 3.

LTLA 104. Latin Prose (4)
Readings in Latin from Latin prose. May be taken for credit up to four times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTLA 1, 2, and 3.

LTLA 105. Topics in Latin Literature (4)
Readings in Latin covering specific topics in Latin literature. May be taken for credit up to four times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTLA 1, 2, and 3.

LTLA 198. Directed Group Study (4)
Directed group study in areas of Latin literature not normally covered in courses. May be taken for credit up to four times as topics vary. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: department approval.

LTLA 199. Special Studies (2 or 4)
Tutorial; individual guided reading in areas of Latin literature not normally covered in courses. May be taken for credit up to four times as topics vary. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: department approval.

LTRU 1A. First-Year Russian (5)
First-year Russian, with attention to reading, writing, and speaking.

LTRU 1B. First-Year Russian (5)
First-year Russian, with attention to reading, writing, and speaking. Prerequisites: LTRU 1A or its equivalent or consent of instructor.

LTRU 1C. First-Year Russian (5)
First-year Russian, with attention to reading, writing, and speaking. Prerequisites: LTRU 1B or its equivalent or consent of instructor.

LTRU 2A. Second-Year Russian (5)
Second-year Russian grammar, with attention to reading, writing, and speaking. Prerequisites: LTRU 1C or its equivalent or consent of instructor.

LTRU 2B. Second-Year Russian (5)
Second-year Russian grammar, with attention to reading, writing, and speaking. Prerequisites: LTRU 2A or its equivalent or consent of instructor.

LTRU 104A. Advanced Practicum in Russian: Linguistic Skills Development (4)
Advanced Russian grammar taught for varying ability levels. Close work with original texts and film to develop comprehension, production, and analytical skills. May be taken for credit up to two times. Prerequisites: LTRU 2B or its equivalent or consent of instructor.

LTRU 104B. Advanced Practicum in Russian: Analysis of Text and Film (4)
Development of advanced skills in reading, writing, and conversation. Course based on written and oral texts of various genres and styles. Individualized program to meet specific student needs. May be taken for credit up to two times. Prerequisites: LTRU 104A or its equivalent or consent of instructor.

LTRU 104C. Advanced Practicum in Russian: Analysis of Text and Film (4)
Development of advanced skills in reading, writing, and conversation. Course based on written and oral texts of various genres and styles. Individualized program to meet specific student needs. May be taken for credit up to two times. Prerequisites: LTRU 104A or its equivalent or consent of instructor.

LTRU 110A. Survey of Russian and Soviet Literature in Translation, 1800–1860 (4)
A study of literary works from 1800–1860.

LTRU 110B. Survey of Russian and Soviet Literature in Translation, 1860–1917 (4)
A study of literary works from 1860–1917.

LTRU 110C. Survey of Russian and Soviet Literature in Translation, 1917–present (4)
A study of literary works from 1917–present.

LTRU 123. Single Author in Russian Literature in Translation (4)
Study of the works of a single Russian author. LTEU 158 and LTRU 123 may be taken for credit for a combined total of three times as topics vary.

LTRU 150. Russian Culture (4)
An introduction to Russia’s past and present through the cross-disciplinary study of literature, the visual and performing arts, social and political thought, civic rituals, popular entertainments, values and practices from 1825 to the present. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

LTRU 198. Directed Group Study (4)
Directed group study in areas of Russian literature not normally covered in courses. May be taken for credit up to four times as topics vary. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: upper-division standing and permission of department.

LTRU 199. Special Studies (2 or 4)
Tutorial; individual guided reading in areas of Russian literature not normally covered in courses. May be taken for credit up to four times as topics vary. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: upper-division standing and permission of department.

LTSP 2A. Intermediate Spanish I: Foundations (5)
Course is taught in Spanish, emphasizing the development of reading ability, listening comprehension, and writing skills. It includes grammar review, weekly compositions, and class discussions. Prerequisites: LISP 1C/1CX or LISP 1D/DX, or score of 3 on AP Spanish Language Exam, or placement result of 3 or 4 the Language Placement Exam—Spanish, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 2B. Intermediate Spanish II: Readings and Composition (5)
Review of major points of grammar with emphasis on critical reading and interpretation of Spanish texts through class discussions, vocabulary development, and written compositions. It is a continuation of LTSP 2A. Prerequisites: LTSP 2A or score of 4 on AP Spanish language or 3 on AP Spanish literature exams or consent of instructor.

LTSP 2C. Intermediate Spanish III: Cultural Topics and Composition (5)
Continuation of LTSP 2B, with special emphasis in writing and translation. It includes discussion of cultural topics as well as grammar review and composition, further developing the ability to read articles, essays, and longer pieces of fiction/nonfictional texts. Prerequisites: LTSP 2B or score of 5 on AP Spanish language or 4 on AP Spanish literature exams or consent of instructor.

LTSP 2D. Intermediate Spanish I: Spanish for Bilingual Speakers (4)
Spanish for native speakers. Designed for bilingual students seeking to become biliterate. Reading and writing skills stressed with special emphasis on improvement of written expression and problems of grammar and orthography. Prepares native speakers with little or no formal training in Spanish for more advanced courses. Prerequisites: native speaking ability and/or consent of instructor.

LTSP 2E. Intermediate Spanish II: Spanish for Bilingual Speakers (4)
Second course in a sequence designed for bilingual students seeking to become biliterate. Special emphasis given to improvement of written expression, grammar, and orthography. Prepares bilingual students with little or no formal training in Spanish for more advanced course work. Prerequisites: LTSP 2D and/or consent of instructor.

LTSP 87. First-year Student Seminar (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students.

LTSP 100A. Advanced Spanish Reading and Writing for the Humanities and the Social Sciences (4)
Advanced development of writing and reading skills in Spanish through the analysis of cultural production from Latin America and Spain. Introduction to literary and cultural analysis in preparation for upper-division Spanish literature courses and/or to the development of near-native writing and reading proficiency in Spanish. In addition, students will learn how to formulate formal and academic arguments in Spanish for more advanced research in Spanish. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTSP 2C.

LTSP 100B. Advanced Spanish Reading and Writing for the Humanities and the Social Sciences (heritage speakers) (4)
Advanced development of writing and reading skills in Spanish for heritage speakers through the analysis of cultural production from Latin America and Spain. Introduction to literary and cultural analysis in preparation for upper-division Spanish literature courses and/or to perfecting writing and reading proficiency in Spanish. In addition, students will learn how to formulate formal and academic arguments in Spanish as the basis for more advanced research in Spanish. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTSP 2E.

LTSP 101. Major Works of the Middle Ages (4)
Major Spanish literary works of the Middle Ages and Renaissance as seen against the historical and intellectual background of this period. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTSP 100A or 100B, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 116. Representations of Spanish Colonialism (4)
Analysis of selected materials that represent the cultural and political relationship between Spain and its colonies. Close reading of literary texts and historical documents. Specific periods covered will fall between the origins of empire in the early sixteenth century to the demise of imperial Spain in 1898; topics may include cultural exchanges between Spain and Latin America, the Philippines, or the US Southwest. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTSP 100A or 100B, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 123. Topics in Modern Spanish Culture (4)
Investigation of selected topics concerning Spanish cultural production after 1800. Topics might focus on a genre (film, popular novel, theatre) or on the transformations of a theme or metaphor (nation, femininity, the uncanny). May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTSP 100A or 100B, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 134. Literature of the Southern Cone (4)
Study of movements, traditions, key authors, or major trends in Argentine, Paraguayan, Uruguayan, and Chilean literatures, such as gaucho poetry, the realist novel, modern urban narratives, the Borges School, etc. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTSP 100A or 100B, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 135A. Mexican Literature before 1910 (4)
Explores the relationships among cultural production, politics, and societal changes in Mexico before the 1910 Revolution, specifically the roles of intellectuals and popular culture in nation-building and modernization. Readings may include didactic literature and historiographic writings, forms of popular discourse, as well as novels and poetry. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTSP 100A or 100B, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 135B. Modern Mexican Literature (4)
Study of popular novels, movements, traditions, key authors, or major trends in modern Mexican literature. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTSP 100A or 100B, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 136. Andean Literature (4)
Study of movements, traditions, key authors, or major trends in Peruvian, Ecuadorian, and Bolivian literatures, such as indigenismo, urban narrative, and the works of authors such as Vallejo, Icaza, Arguedas, Vargas Llosa. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTSP 100A or 100B, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 137. Caribbean Literature (4)
Study of movements, traditions, key authors, or major trends in Caribbean literature in Spanish, such as the romantic movement, the literature of independence, the essay tradition, Afro-Antillean literature, the historical novel. May be taken for credit up to four times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTSP 100A or 100B, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 138. Central American Literature (4)
Study of movements, traditions, key authors, or major trends in the literatures of Guatemala, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Honduras, Costa Rica, and Panama, such as the anti-imperialist novel, indigenismo, guerrilla poetry, and testimonio. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTSP 100A or 100B, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 145. Memory, Human Rights, and Culture in Iberia and Latin America (4)
This course analyzes cultural representations (novels, films, poems, theatre plays, performances, etc.) that reconstruct the memory of human rights abuses in Iberia and/or Latin America. The course addresses the relationship between memory and justice in post-dictatorial societies. Prerequisites: LTSP 100A or 100B, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 150. Chicanx/Latinx Cultural Expressions (4)
This course examines Chicanx/Latinx cultural expressions and representations through a broad range of forms, such as television, film, music, literature, etc. Students will explore how past and present social and political experiences inform Chicanx/Latinx expressive forms. Students will also consider the global reach of Chicanx/Latinx cultural forms. Prerequisites: LTSP 100A or 100B, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 150A. Early Latino/a-Chicano/a Cultural Production: 1848 to 1960 (4)
Cross-disciplinary study of nineteenth- and early twentieth-century Latino/a-Chicano/a literature, folklore, music, testimonio, or other cultural practices. Specific periods covered will fall between the immediate aftermath of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo to the Cuban revolution. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTSP 100A or 100B, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 150B. Contemporary Chicano/a-Latino/a Cultural Production: 1960 to Present (4)
Cross-disciplinary study of late twentieth-century Latino/a-Chicano/a literature, the visual and performing arts, film, or other cultural practices. Specific periods covered will fall between the Kennedy years to the era of neoliberalism and the creation of “Hispanic” or Latino identities. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTSP 100A or 100B, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 151. Topics in Chicano/a-Latino/a Cultures (4)
Cross-disciplinary study of late twentieth-century Chicano/a-Latino/a literature, the visual and performing arts, film, or other cultural practices. Representative areas of study are social movements, revolution, immigration, globalization, gender and sexuality, cultures of the US-Mexican border, and Chicano/a-Mexicano/a literary relations. May be taken up to two times for credit as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTSP 100A or 100B, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 155. Asia in Latin America (4)
This course introduces students to the comparative and multidisciplinary study of cultural productions and historical formations that link Asia and Latin America. Students will be exposed to diverse methodologies drawn from transpacific studies, postcolonial theory, critical race studies, and the study of imperialism, colonialism, global modernity, and popular cultures. Prerequisites: LTSP 100A or 100B, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 166. Creative Writing (4)
A workshop designed to foster and encourage writing in Spanish of students working on short forms of fiction. The workshop will include discussions of techniques and intensive writing. Prerequisites: LTSP 100A or 100B, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 169. Latin American Popular and Mass Cultures (4)
This class explores Latin American popular culture. Students will be exposed to cultural forms traditionally associated with the popular sectors of Latin American societies such as the soap opera, popular music, TV series, oral narratives, detective fiction, or the romantic novel. These non-elitist forms of cultural expressions will provide access to the structure of feeling of the non-white lower classes in the region. Prerequisites: LTSP 100A or 100B, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 170. Contemporary Theories of Cultural Production (4)
Selected readings in recent cultural and literary theory. Students will be exposed to a variety of methodologies drawn from the Latin American, European, and US traditions. The course is recommended for students who plan to pursue graduate work in literature. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTSP 100A or 100B, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 172. Indigenista Themes in Latin American Literature (4)
Study of the literary modes by which nineteenth- and twentieth-century authors have interpreted the themes of indigenous survival and resistance in Latin America, primarily in Mexico and the Andean region. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTSP 100A or 100B, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 174. Topics in Culture and Politics (4)
Study of the relationships between cultural production (literature, film, popular cultures), social change, and political conflict, covering topics such as colonialism, imperialism, modernization, social movements, dictatorship, revolution. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTSP 100A or 100B, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 175. Feminisms, Gender, and Sexuality in Latin America (4)
This course analyzes feminist studies in Latin America. It addresses the theoretical, intellectual, and activist trajectories as well as the gender and sexuality configurations in the region. In addition, students will be able to work with different types of texts and archives produced in Latin America. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTSP 100A or 100B, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 176. Literature and Nation (4)
Study of literature as a means through which the nation has been imagined and as a site of debates over national identity and citizenship. Course materials may focus on Spain and/or Latin America. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTSP 100A or 100B, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 177. Literary and Historical Migrations (4)
This course will focus on a variety of Latin American and/or Spanish intra- and international migrations throughout the world and on the literature produced by these exiles or immigrants. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary. Prerequisites: LTSP 100A or 100B, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 180. Film and Visual Arts in Latin America (4)
This course analyzes different visual narratives (film, television, art, graffiti, murals, etc.) produced in Latin America. Students will be exposed to both classic and contemporary films from the region as well as to other relevant forms of visual culture in their historical context. These visual narratives will be related both to the political and historical context of Latin America. Prerequisites: LTSP 100A or 100B, or consent of instructor.

LTSP 196. Honors Thesis (4)
Senior thesis research and writing for students who have been accepted for the Literature Honors Program and who have completed LTWL 191. Oral Exam. Prerequisites: department approval.

LTSP 198. Directed Group Study (4)
Directed group study in areas of Spanish literature not normally covered in courses. May be taken for credit up to four times as topics vary. (P/NP grade only.) Prerequisites: department approval.

LTSP 199. Special Studies (2 or 4)
Tutorial: individual guided reading in areas of Spanish literature not normally covered in courses. May be taken for credit up to four times as topics vary. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: upper-division standing and department approval.

LTTH 110. History of Criticism (4)
A critical and interpretive review of some of the major documents in criticism from the classical period to the present time.

LTTH 115. Introduction to Critical Theory (4)
A critical review of major contemporary theories of the nature of literature, its sociocultural function, and appropriate modes of evaluation. May be taken for credit up to four times as topics vary.

LTTH 150. Topics in Critical Theory (4)
Selected topics in critical theory such as a particular mode of literary theory; comparative study of theories of text and image; a problem or theme in the history of theory; and issues involved in the relationship between fiction and other discourses (science, law, history, philosophy, music). May be taken for credit up to four times as topics vary.

LTTH 198. Directed Group Study (4)
Directed group study, under the guidance of a member of the faculty, in an area not covered in courses currently offered by the department. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. (P/NP only.)

LTTH 199. Special Studies (2 or 4)
Individual reading in an area not covered in courses currently offered by the department. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. (P/NP only.)

LTWL 19A-B-C. Introduction to the Ancient Greeks and Romans (4-4-4)
An introductory study of ancient Greece and Rome, their literature, myth, philosophy, history, and art.

LTWL 87. First-year Student Seminar (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students.

LTWL 100. Mythology (4)
A study of various bodies of myth: their content, form, and meaning. May be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary.

LTWL 101. Death and Life in Ancient Egypt (4)
Who were the Egyptians? What was life like in ancient Egypt? How did they view themselves and the world around them? To answer these questions, this course will take a whirlwind tour covering some 4,000 years. To break up our historical tour de force we will often pause to look at themes that make Egyptian civilization so worth our collective attention. This includes mythology, language and literature, the afterlife, and the legacy of ancient Egypt today. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTWL 102. Life and Death in Ancient Mesopotamia (4)
Who were the people of Mesopotamia? What was life like in ancient Sumer and Babylon? How did they view themselves and the world around them? To answer these questions, this course will take a rapid tour covering about 4,000 years. To break up our historical tour de force we will often pause to look at themes that make Mesopotamian civilization so interesting. This includes mythology, language and literature, magic, medicine, the afterlife, and the legacy of ancient Mesopotamia today.

LTWL 106. The Classical Tradition (4)
Greek and Roman literature in translation. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTWL 110B. Folk and Fairy Tales (4)
A study of folk and fairy tales from various cultures, from the point of view of literary form, psychological meaning, and cultural function. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTWL 114. Children’s Literature (4)
A study of literature written for children in various cultures and periods. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTWL 116. Adolescent Literature (4)
A study of fiction written for the young adult in various cultures and periods. Consideration will be given to the young adult hero in fiction. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTWL 120. Popular Literature and Culture (4)
A study of various popular forms—such as pop music, cult books, film, fashion, magazines, graphic arts—within a broader cultural context. Focus may be on a particular genre (e.g., best sellers) or era (e.g., the sixties). May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTWL 123. Vampires in Literature (4)
A study of representations of the vampire through a variety of methodological perspectives with an emphasis on historical context and cultural symbolism.

LTWL 124. Science Fiction (4)
An exploration of the genre—past and present, in literature and the visual media—as a cultural response to scientific and technological change, as modern mythmaking, and as an enterprise serving a substantial fan subculture. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTWL 128. Introduction to Semiotics and Applications (4)
Semiotics, basically a theory of signification, describes the models and conceptual constructs through which meaning is grasped and produced. Background in the history of semiotics and its dominant models. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTWL 129. Wisdom: The Literature of Authority (4)
What is wisdom? Does wisdom refer to a specific type of discourse; a literary genre; a specific content that holds true transculturally and transtemporally? This class will consider these questions by reading literature from diverse times and places.

LTWL 134. Cinema and Islam (4)
This course examines histories and theories of cinema and Islam. It offers an overview on intersections between film and religious experience in various Muslim cultures, and how such experiences are ultimately grounded in shifting historical and social settings.

LTWL 135. The Buddhist Imaginary (4)
An introduction to the imaginative universe of Indian Buddhism, with a focus on the connection between cosmological models and liberative practices. In this class we read Buddhist narrative and doctrinal literatures, supplemented by archaeological and art historical artifacts.

LTWL 136. Socially Engaged Buddhism (4)
This course explores the writings of Buddhists who actively engage with the problems of the world: social, environmental, economic, political. We will examine the historical development of engaged Buddhism in light of traditional Buddhist concepts of morality, interdependence, and liberation.

LTWL 138. Critical Religion Studies (4)
Selected topics, texts, and problems in the study of religion. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTWL 140. Novel and History in the Third World (4)
This course sets out to explore the relation between the novel and the “dependent” history of the Third World, contrasting and comparing the uses of history in the European novel as defined in the theoretical analysis of Lukacs with uses of history in the Third World novel. An analysis of major themes and movements common to selected ethnic literature in the United States and national literatures in the Third World.

LTWL 143. Arab Literatures and Cultures (4)
Lecture/discussion course focusing on Arab literatures and cultures. It could offer study of any period of Arab cultures, from ante-Islam to the contemporary world. Topics may include themes (e.g., gender, social critique) or focus on specific genres or aesthetics (film, novel, realism). May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTWL 145. South Asian Religious Literatures: Selected Topics (4)
One or two topics in the religious literatures of South Asia will be examined in depth. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTWL 150. Modernity and Literature (4)
Explores the various cross-cultural historical, philosophical, and aesthetic ideas which formed the basis of most twentieth-century literature. Literature from the Americas, Europe, Asia, and Africa will be studied through lectures and the reading of texts in English translation. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTWL 155. Gender Studies (4)
The study of the construction of sexual differences in literature and culture. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTWL 156. Asian Diasporic Cinema (4)
This course examines the presence of diasporic Asians in the U.S. through film and visual media. The Asian diasporic figures we examine will include the immigrant, the exile, the refugee, the transnational adoptee, the Internet bride, the queer subject, and the restauranteur. How does diaspora challenge and reinforce national identity? How does it interrogate notions of ethnic, racial, and cultural authenticity? In what ways does diaspora trouble the idea of an original homeland?

LTWL 157. Iranian Film (4)
Course sets out to explore the history and theory of Iranian films in the context of the country’s political, cultural, and religious settings since 1945. Students are expected to watch and discuss Iranian films, particularly the postrevolutionary films of Kiarostami and Mokhbalbaf. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTWL 158A. Topics in the New Testament (4)
Literary and sociohistorical considerations of the diverse writings that developed into the New Testament. Topics include Jewish origins of the “Jesus movement” within Greco-Roman culture; varying patterns of belief/practice among earliest communities; oral tradition and development of canon. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTWL 158B. Topics in Early Christian Texts and Cultures (4)
This course investigates the manner in which texts shape religious identities on the individual and communal level in sociohistorical and cultural contexts: various topics include portraits of Jesus, saints’ lives, death and afterlife, martyrdom, demonology, apocalypticism, Christianity, and empire. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTWL 158C. Topics in Other Christianities (4)
A survey of the Christian texts that comprise the fatalities of the battles defining Christian canon (e.g., apocryphal acts, noncanonical gospels, and “Gnostic” texts). Considers the social communities, theological views, religious identities, and practices reflected in largely forgotten texts. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTWL 159. Digital Middle East: Culture, Politics, and Religion (4)
This course examines the role of Information Communication Technologies (ICTs) such as the internet, mobile, and satellite TV in the reshaping of the Middle East and North Africa. It will focus on how ICTs like the internet are changing culture, politics, and religion in the region and implication of such transformations.

LTWL 160. Women and Literature (4)
This course will explore the relationship between women and literature, i.e., women as producers of literature, as objects of literary discourse, and as readers. Foreign language texts will be read in translation. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTWL 165. Literature and the Environment (4)
With primarily American (and a couple of English) readings, the course inquires into the relation of human and nonhuman nature. Topics include wilderness, animals, Native American thought, women in nature, description as a kind of writing, the spirituality of place.

LTWL 166. The Yiddish Novel (4)
Yiddish literature is much more than folk songs and jokes. We will read major American and European works by Nobel laureate I. B. Singer, his brother I. J. Singer, and his sister Esther Kreytman, Sholem Aleichem, Mendele, Chava Rozenfarb, and others. (In English translation.)

LTWL 168. Death and Desire in India (4)
This class investigates the link between desire and death in classical and modern Hindu thought. It considers the stories of Hindu deities, as well as the lives of contemporary South Asian men and women, in literature and film.

LTWL 172. Special Topics in Literature (4)
Studies in specialized literary, philosophic, and artistic movements, approaches to literature, literary ideas, historical moments, etc. LTWL 172 and LTWL 172GS may be taken for credit for a combined total of three times.

LTWL 174. Law and Literature (4)
Examines law in its cultural context by investigating the intersections between law and literature. Through readings of literary texts alongside laws, court cases, and legal theory, this course explores the relationships between literary and legal modes of textual interpretation. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTWL 176. Literature and Ideas (4)
The course will center on writers or movements of international literary, cultural, or ideological significance. The texts studied, if foreign, may be read either in the original language or in English. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTWL 177. Literature and Aging (4)
A humanistic approach to the research field of healthy aging. Students learn to bring humanistic practices to the study of aging in the fields of neurobiology, biomedical engineering, neuroscience, and medical education. 

LTWL 180. Film Studies and Literature: Film History (4)
The study of film history and its effects upon methods of styles in literary history. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTWL 181. Film Studies and Literature: Film Movement (4)
Study of analogies between literary movements and film movements. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTWL 183. Film Studies and Literature: Director’s Work (4)
Methods of criticism of author’s work applied to the study and analysis of film director’s style and work. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTWL 184. Film Studies and Literature: Close Analysis of Filmic Text (4)
Methods of literary analysis applied to the study of shots, sequences, poetics, and deep structure in filmic discourse. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.

LTWL 191. Honors Seminar (4)
Explorations in critical theory and method. This course, designed to prepare students to write an honors thesis, is open only to literature majors invited into the department’s Honors Program.

LTWL 192. Senior Seminar in Literatures of the World (1)
The Senior Seminar Program is designed to allow senior undergraduates to meet with faculty members in a small group setting to explore an intellectual topic in literature (at the upper-division level). Senior Seminars may be offered in all campus departments. Topics will vary from quarter to quarter. Senior Seminars may be taken for credit up to four times, with a change in topic, and permission of the department. Enrollment is limited to twenty students, with preference given to seniors. Prerequisites: department stamp and/or consent of instructor.

LTWL 194. Capstone Course for Literature Majors (4)
An advanced seminar open to all literature majors in their senior year. Required for those interested in the Honors Program. It offers an integrative experience by considering key facets of the discipline, including literary theory/historiography, knowledge of neighboring disciplines, and relevance of literature/culture studies in various professions outside of academia. Prerequisites: senior standing.

LTWL 194A. Honors Practicum (1)
Honors practicum for those students in the literature department Honors Program. This is a one-unit course for which students in the Honors Program will present their work as part of organized panels at an Honors Program conference (within the department). Students will receive a P/NP grade for LTWL 194A for completing the presentation. Prerequisites: LTWL 194 or LTWR 194, and senior standing.

LTWL 196. Honors Thesis (4)
Senior thesis research and writing for students who have been accepted for the Literature Honors Program and who have completed LTWL 191. Oral exam. Prerequisites: department approval.

LTWL 198. Directed Group Study (4)
Research seminars and research, under the direction of faculty member. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: department approval.

LTWL 199. Special Studies (2 or 4)
Tutorial; individual guided reading in areas of literature (in translation) not normally covered in courses. May be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: upper-division standing and department approval.

LTWR 8A. Writing Fiction (4)
Study of fiction in both theory and practice. Narrative technique studied in terms of subjectivity and atmosphere, description, dialogue, and the editing process will be introduced through readings from the history of the novel and short story. Students are required to attend at least three New Writing Series readings during the quarter. Prerequisites: CAT 2 and 3 or DOC 2 and 3 or HUM 1 and 2 or MCWP 40 and 50 or MMW 12 and 13 or WARR 11A-B or WCWP 10A-B or SYN 1 and 2.

LTWR 8B. Writing Poetry (4)
Study and practice of poetry as artistic and communal expression. Techniques of composition (traditional forms, avant garde techniques, dramatic monologue, performance poetry, and new genre) studied through written and spoken examples of poetry. Students are required to attend at least three New Writing Series readings during the quarter. Prerequisites: CAT 2 and 3 or DOC 2 and 3 or HUM 1 and 2 or MCWP 40 and 50 or MMW 12 and 13 or WARR 11A-B or WCWP 10A-B or SYN 1 and 2.

LTWR 8C. Writing Nonfiction (4)
Study of nonfictional prose in terms of genre and craft. Techniques of composition (journalism, essay, letters, reviews) will be studied through written examples of the genre. Prerequisites: CAT 2 and 3 or DOC 2 and 3 or HUM 1 and 2 or MCWP 40 and 50 or MMW 12 and 13 or WARR 11A-B or WCWP 10A-B or SYN 1 and 2. Completion of college writing requirement.

LTWR 100. Short Fiction Workshop (4)
A workshop for students with some experience and special interest in writing fiction. This workshop is designed to encourage regular writing in the short forms of prose fiction and to permit students to experiment with various forms. There will be discussion of student work, together with analysis and discussion of representative examples of short fiction from the present and previous ages. LTWR 100 and LTWR 100GS may be taken for credit for a combined total of three times. Restricted to major/minor code LT34 during first pass of registration. All other students may register during second pass of registration with the approval of the department. Prerequisites: LTWR 8A.

LTWR 101. Writing Fiction in Spanish (4)
A workshop for students with interest in writing fiction in Spanish. Includes discussion of student work, together with analysis and discussion of representative examples of short fiction from the present and previous ages. A working knowledge of Spanish is required. May be taken for credit up to three times. Restricted to major/minor code LT34 during first pass of registration. All other students may register during second pass of registration with the approval of the department. Prerequisites: LTWR 8A; LTSP 50A or 50B or 50C.

LTWR 102. Poetry Workshop (4)
A workshop for students with some experience and special interest in writing poetry. This workshop is designed to encourage regular writing of poetry. There will be discussion of student work, together with analysis and discussion of representative examples of poetry from the present and previous ages. May be taken for credit up to three times. Restricted to major/minor code LT34 during first pass of registration. All other students may register during second pass of registration with the approval of the department. Prerequisites: LTWR 8B.

LTWR 103. Digital Poetics Workshop (4)
This workshop includes instruction on using software and writing basic computer code to allow students to create innovative web-based works that experiment with poetic form, draw on rich media resources, and provide more accessibility and interactivity for public audiences. May be taken for credit up to three times. Restricted to major/minor code LT34 during first pass of registration. All other students may register during second pass of registration with the approval of the department. Prerequisites: LTWR 8B.

LTWR 104A. The Novella I (4)
A two-quarter workshop for fiction writers ready to explore a longer form and committed to developing a single piece over the course of two consecutive quarters. In addition to analyzing student work, we will read and discuss a wide range of published novellas. Two-quarter sequence; students must complete LTWR 104A and LTWR 104B in order to receive final grade in both courses. Restricted to major/minor code LT34 during first pass of registration. All other students may register during second pass of registration with the approval of the department. Prerequisites: LTWR 100.

LTWR 104B. The Novella II (4)
A continuation of LTWR 104A in which fiction writers complete the novella manuscripts they began during the previous quarter. Each student will produce a novella of at least fifty revised pages by the end of the quarter. We will continue to read and discuss published novellas with a particular emphasis on narrative strategy, structure, and revision. Two-quarter sequence; students must complete LTWR 104A and LTWR 104B in order to receive final grade in both courses. Restricted to major/minor code LT34 during first pass of registration. All other students may register during second pass of registration with the approval of the department. Prerequisites: LTWR 104A.

LTWR 106. Science Fiction, Fantasy, and Irrealism Workshop (4)
In this workshop, students will practice skills of narration, characterization, and style with particular attention to the demands of nonrealistic genres, especially the challenge of suspending disbelief in fictional environments that defy conventional logic. Readings and lectures will accompany writing exercises. May be taken for credit up to three times. Restricted to major/minor code LT34 during first pass of registration. All other students may register during second pass of registration with the approval of the department. Prerequisites: LTWR 8A.

LTWR 109. Writing and Publishing Children’s Literature (4)
A workshop in writing for children, with the additional focus of exploring successful approaches to publication of children’s stories. There will be regular weekly reading and writing assignments. May be taken for credit up to three times. Restricted to major/minor code LT34 during first pass of registration. All other students may register during second pass of registration with the approval of the department. Prerequisites: LTWR 8A.

LTWR 110. Screen Writing (4)
A workshop designed to encourage writing of original screenplays and adaptations. There will be discussion of study work, together with analysis of discussion of representative examples of screen writing. May be taken for credit up to three times. Restricted to major/minor code LT34 during first pass of registration. All other students may register during second pass of registration with the approval of the department.

LTWR 113. Intercultural Writing Workshop (4)
This course is an introduction to modes of writing from other cultural systems vastly different from the cultural-aesthetic assumptions of Anglo American writing. While disclosing the limitations of the English language, this course attempts to provide new language strategies for students. May be taken for credit up to three times. Restricted to major/minor code LT34 during first pass of registration. All other students may register during second pass of registration with the approval of the department. Prerequisites: LTWR 8A, 8B, or 8C.

LTWR 114. Graphic Texts Workshop (4)
From illuminated manuscripts to digital literature, from alphabets to concrete poems, from artists’ books to comics, this course explores the histories and techniques of combinatory image/word literary arts. The course may emphasize specific movements or genres. May be taken for credit up to three times. Restricted to major/minor code LT34 during first pass of registration. All other students may register during second pass of registration with the approval of the department. Prerequisites: LTWR 8A or 8B or 8C.

LTWR 115. Experimental Writing Workshop (4)
This workshop explores writing for which the traditional generic distinctions of prose/poetry, fiction/documentary, narrative/discourse do not apply. Students taking this course will be asked to challenge the boundaries of literature to discover new forms and modes of expression. May be taken for credit up to three times. Restricted to major/minor code LT34 during first pass of registration. All other students may register during second pass of registration with the approval of the department. Prerequisites: LTWR 8A, 8B, or 8C.

LTWR 119. Writing for Performance Workshop (4)
A workshop and survey of experimental approaches to the writing and production of performance works in a range of literary genres. Emphasis will be placed on the integration of written texts with nonverbal elements from the visual arts, theatre, and music. May be taken for credit up to three times. Restricted to major/minor code LT34 during first pass of registration. All other students may register during second pass of registration with the approval of the department. Prerequisites: LTWR 8A or 8B.

LTWR 120. Personal Narrative Workshop (4)
A workshop designed to encourage regular writing of all forms of personal experience narrative, including journals, autobiography, firsthand biography, and firsthand chronicle. Instructor and students will discuss student work as well as published personal narratives. May be taken for credit up to three times. Restricted to major/minor code LT34 during first pass of registration. All other students may register during second pass of registration with the approval of the department. Prerequisites: LTWR 8A, 8B, or 8C.

LTWR 121. Media Writing Workshop (4)
Workshop focusing on the review, the op-ed piece, the column, the blurb, the profile, the interview, and “content-providing” for websites. We’ll examine current examples of media writing; students will produce a body of work and critique one another’s productions. May be taken for credit up to three times. Restricted to major/minor code LT34 during first pass of registration. All other students may register during second pass of registration with the approval of the department. Prerequisites: LTWR 8C.

LTWR 122. Writing for the Sciences Workshop (4)
A workshop in writing about science for the public. Students will study and then construct metaphors or analogues that introduce readers to scientific perplexities. Completion of LTWR 8A, 8B, or 8C highly recommended. May be taken for credit up to three times. Restricted to major/minor code LT34 during first pass of registration. All other students may register during second pass of registration with the approval of the department.

LTWR 124. Translation of Literary Texts Workshop (4)
A writing workshop on the theory and practice of literary translation. Students will translate literary texts and workshop with the instructor and other course members. Selected readings in translation theory. May be taken for credit up to three times. Restricted to major/minor code LT34 during first pass of registration. All other students may register during second pass of registration with the approval of the department. Prerequisites: LTWR 8A, 8B, or 8C.

LTWR 126. Creative Nonfiction Workshop (4)
A writing, reading, and critical-thinking workshop designed to produce nonfiction pieces that fall outside the limits of the essay form. Included are travel narratives, memoir, and information-based writing that transform their own materials into compelling literature. May be taken for credit up to three times. Restricted to major/minor code LT34 during first pass of registration. All other students may register during second pass of registration with the approval of the department. Prerequisites: LTWR 8C.

LTWR 129. Distributing Literature Workshop (4)
Workshop designed to critique and engage the means of distributing literature within culture. Publishing from “zine” through mainstream publication; web publishings; readings and “slams”; publicity and funding; colloquia with writers; politics and literature; and the uses of performance and media. May be taken for credit up to three times. Restricted to major/minor code LT34 during first pass of registration. All other students may register during second pass of registration with the approval of the department. Prerequisites: LTWR 100, LTWR 102, or LTWR 120.

LTWR 140. History of Writing (4)
A review of the history of the development of alphabets and writing systems. Survey of the rise of literacy since the fifteenth century and analysis of continuing literacy problems in developed and developing countries. Restricted to major/minor code LT34 during first pass of registration. All other students may register during second pass of registration with the approval of the department.

LTWR 143. Stylistics and Grammar (4)
A close look at sentence-level features of written discourse–stylistics and sentence grammars. Students will review recent research on these topics and experiment in their own writing with various stylistic and syntactic options. Restricted to major/minor code LT34 during first pass of registration. All other students may register during second pass of registration with the approval of the department.

LTWR 144. The Teaching of Writing (4)
Wide reading in current theory and practice of teaching writing in schools and colleges. Careful attention to various models of classroom writing instruction and to different approaches in the individual conference. Students in this course may observe instruction in the UC San Diego college writing programs or tutor first-year students in those programs. Restricted to major/minor code LT34 during first pass of registration. All other students may register during second pass of registration with the approval of the department.

LTWR 148. Theory for Writers/Writing for Theory (4)
Hybrid workshop offering writing students a working knowledge of literary theory while exposing literature students to practical techniques from poetry, fiction, and nonfiction to refresh their writing of theoretical nonfiction texts. Discussion of student work and published work. Restricted to major/minor code LT34 during first pass of registration. All other students may register during second pass of registration with the approval of the department.

LTWR 194. Capstone Course for Writing Majors (4)
An advanced seminar open to all writing majors in their senior year. Required for those interested in the Honors Program. It offers an integrative experience by considering key facets of the discipline and profession, including relationships between aesthetics/culture and politics, genre writing, craft/technique, literary theories/theories of writing, and distribution/publication. Restricted to major code LT34 or consent of the instructor and department. Prerequisites: senior standing.

LTWR 195. Apprentice Teaching (4)
Undergraduate instruction assistance. A student will 1 assist TA in editing students’ writing for LTWR 8A-B-C during class and outside of class; and 2 prepare a paper and report for the professor at the end of the quarter. May be taken for credit up to two times. Prerequisites: department approval.

LTWR 196. Honors Thesis (4)
Senior thesis research and writing for students who have been accepted for the Literature Honors Program. Prerequisites: department approval.

LTWR 198. Directed Group Study (2 or 4)
Directed group study in areas of writing not normally covered in courses. May be taken for credit up to three times. (P/NP grades only.)

LTWR 199. Special Studies (2 or 4)
Tutorial; individual guidance in areas of writing not normally covered in courses. May be taken for credit up to three times. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: upper-division standing and department approval.

MMW 11. Prehistory and Ancient Foundations (4)
This course explores human origins, the development of early forms of social and political organization, the strategies that early societies used to negotiate their physical and social environments, and the appearance of influential cultural traditions across the ancient world (to circa 100 BCE). Topics include the emergence of agriculture, the relationship between nomad and settled, the birth of the city and the expanding human “footprint,” the development of writing, foundational religious and cosmological ideas and narratives, influential models of visual and material culture, and changing forms of social stratification and inequality. Students may not receive credit for both MMW 11 and MMW 11R. Must be taken for a letter grade to meet the requirement.

MMW 12. Transforming Traditions and Emerging World Communities, circa 100 BCE–1200 CE (6)
This course provides a global perspective on the past from circa 100 BCE to circa 1200 CE, examining the emergence of interregional networks and empires and their relationship with the advent and expansion of diverse religious movements, including Christianity, Islam, and Buddhism, as well as cross-cultural contacts and exchanges. The course also explores forms of identity (ethnic, religious, and other); models of inclusion and exclusion; systems of power, hierarchy, and slavery; and the human-environmental relationship. MMW 12 is the first of two writing-intensive courses in the MMW sequence. Prerequisites: satisfaction of the Entry Level Writing Requirement. Must be taken for a letter grade to meet the requirement.

MMW 13. A Globalizing World: Exchanges, Entanglements, and Exploitation, Thirteenth–Eighteenth Century (6)
This course presents a global perspective on the connections, exchanges, and transformations that linked Afro-Eurasia and the Americas during the period from 1200 to 1750 CE. The course examines the nature and consequences of this increasingly connected world. It focuses on spaces of cross-cultural contact and exchange, including the transfer of technologies, ideas, commodities, and customs and their environmental impact; encounters in the form of travel, trade, migration, and invasion; and exploitation through empire, colonization, and slavery, and their manifestation in state violence, intolerance, discrimination, and racism. MMW 13 is the second of two writing-intensive courses in the MMW sequence. Prerequisites: completion of MMW 12. Open to Eleanor Roosevelt College students only. Must be taken for a letter grade to meet the requirement.

MMW 14. Revolution, Industry, and Empire (4)
This course examines the great changes in European society occurring from the late seventeenth century to the time of the Russian Revolution and considers the impact of those changes on the non-Western world. Topics include absolutist states and the Enlightenment, the French and American Revolutions, industrialization, the rise of nationalism and the nation-state, mass politics, Western imperialism, and the colonial experience. Developments in non-Western countries during this period will be examined from their own internal perspectives. Prerequisites: completion of MMW 12 or MMW 2; and completion of MMW 13 or MMW 3; open to Eleanor Roosevelt College students only. Students may not receive credit for both MMW 14 and MMW 5. Must be taken for a letter grade to meet the requirement.

MMW 15. The Contemporary Era: Conflict and Aspirations in a Globalized World, Twentieth–Twenty-First Century (4)
This course explores the cultural, economic, political, and social forces that shaped the twentieth and twenty-first century and contestations over them. It examines the causes and impact of the global and local conflicts and inequalities that have defined the contemporary era. The course addresses efforts to defend and expand freedom, improve quality of life, and increase transnational cooperation and communication that challenge those hierarchies that perpetuate inequality. The course reflects on what this recent history may mean for our collective future. NOTE: In place of MMW 15, you may take MMW 15GS (Global Seminar). Prerequisites: completion of MMW 12 and MMW 13; open to Eleanor Roosevelt College students only. Students may not receive credit for both MMW 15 and MMW 15GS. Must be taken for a letter grade to meet the requirement.

MMW 121. Exploring the Premodern World (4)
MMW 121, the first of two required courses for ERC transfer students, addresses themes and topics from the premodern world (from antiquity to the eighteenth century) and strengthens students’ analytical, research, and writing skills. Students may not receive credit for MMW 121 and 121R. Students who previously took MMW 21 and received a grade of D or F should contact Eleanor Roosevelt College academic advising for guidance. Prerequisites: open to Eleanor Roosevelt College transfer students only. Must be taken for a letter grade to meet the requirement.

MMW 122. Exploring the Modern World (4)
MMW 122, the second of two required courses for ERC transfer students, addresses specific themes and topics from the modern world (from the eighteenth century to the present) and strengthens transfer students’ analytical, research, and writing skills. Students may not receive credit for MMW 22 and 122. Students who previously took MMW 22 and received a grade of D or F should contact Eleanor Roosevelt College academic advising for guidance. Prerequisites: open to Eleanor Roosevelt College transfer students only. Must be taken for a letter grade to meet the requirement.

MGT 3. Quantitative Methods in Business (4) 
Introduction to techniques to develop/analyze data for informed tactical and strategic management decisions: statistical inference, probability, regression analysis, and optimization. Using these analytic approaches, theory-based formulas, and spreadsheets, students explore managerial applications across all areas of business activity.

MGT 4. Financial Accounting (4)
Cross-listed with ECON 4. Recording, organizing, and communicating financial information to business entities.

MGT 5. Managerial Accounting (4)
Internal accounting fundamentals, including cost behavior, cost application methods, overhead allocation methods, break-even analysis, budgeting, cost variance analysis, inventory management, and capital budgeting.

MGT 12. Personal Financial Management (4) 
Course examines management of personal financial assets: savings and checking accounts, fixed assets, and credit cards. Budgeting, loan applications, payment terms, and statement reconciliation will be covered as will credit ratings, cash management, compound interest, bank operations, and contract obligations.

MGT 16. Personal Ethics at Work (4)
Course examines the ethical foundation for choices individuals make every day both in the workplace and in their private lives, the connection between economic and ethical obligations with examples related to privacy, reporting, whistle-blowing, workplace relationships, confidentiality, and intellectual property.

MGT 18. Managing Diverse Teams (4)
The modern workplace includes people different in culture, gender, age, language, religion, education, and more. Students will learn why diverse teams make better decisions and are often integral to the success of organizations. Topics include challenges of diversity, and the impact of emotional, social, and cultural intelligence on team success. Content will include significant attention to the experiences of Asian Americans and African Americans as members and leaders of such diverse teams. Students will not receive credit for both MGT 18 and MGT 18GS.

MGT 18GS. Managing Diverse Teams (4)
The modern workplace includes people different in culture, gender, age, language, religion, education, and more. Students will learn why diverse teams make better decisions and are often integral to the success of organizations. Topics include challenges of diversity, and the impact of emotional, social, and cultural intelligence on team success. Content will include significant attention to the experiences of Asian Americans and African Americans as members and leaders of such diverse teams. Students must submit applications to the International Center Programs Abroad Office and be accepted into the Global Seminar Program. Students will not receive credit for both MGT 18 and MGT 18GS. Program or materials fees may apply.

MGT 45. Principles of Accounting (4)
Covers the principles, methods and applications of general accounting, cost accounting and investment ROI. Development of the three key financial reports and their interrelations, cost identification, product costing, inventory control, operational performance, and investment return

MGT 52. Test and Measurement in the Workplace (4)
This course introduces students to the psychometric, legal, ethical, and practical considerations of using tests and measurements for evidence-based decision-making in the workplace. Emphasis is given to selection and performance measurements for individual, team, business unit and organization-wide use in marketing, STEM, and operations. Student teams will develop managerial recommendations following company specific research and analysis.

MGT 71. Business Process and Operations Management (4)
Effective management of operations is vital to every type of organization. Competitive advantages accrue to firms that can excel in execution and achieve sustained and profitable growth. This course covers the systematic design, execution, and improvement of business processes, projects, and partner relationships. Builds up strategic framework of operations and process management, followed by process analysis including primary operations metrics. Introduces continuous improvement and lean operations. Students will not receive credit for both MGT 71 and MGT 71R.

MGT 71R. Business Process and Operations Management (4)
Effective management of operations is vital to every type of organization. Competitive advantages accrue to firms that can excel in execution and achieve sustained and profitable growth. This course covers the systematic design, execution, and improvement of business processes, projects, and partner relationships. Builds up strategic framework of operations and process management, followed by process analysis including primary operations metrics. Introduces continuous improvement and lean operations. Students will not receive credit for both MGT 71R and MGT 71. This course is a distance education course.

MGT 100. Customer Analytics (4)
Marketers use empirical models to determine, support, and evaluate a wide range of business decisions. This course covers models and estimation techniques commonly used for understanding segmentation, targeting, and positioning; product diffusion; advertising response, among other topics. Prerequisites: ECON 120B or MATH 181B.

MGT 102. E-Commerce (4)
E-commerce is the online exchange of information leading to mutually beneficial transactions. Students will learn and apply skills related to business opportunity ideation and evaluation, customer and market research, sourcing, fulfillment, positioning, pricing, branding, storytelling, store design, user experience testing, website analytics, search engine optimization, social media, content marketing, digital advertising, and online experimentation. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MGT 103. Product Marketing and Management (4)
Defining markets for products and services, segmenting these markets, and targeting critical customers within segments. Strategies to position products and services within segments. The critical role of pricing as well as market research, product management, promotion, selling, and customer support. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MGT 105. Product Promotion and Brand Management (4)
Principles and decisions to be considered in overall communications and promotion strategy for traditional channels and emerging social networks. Decisions on promotional mix, ad design, implementation and evaluation for establishing brand equity, measure brand performance and sustaining brand equity. Prerequisites: MGT 100 or MGT 103.

MGT 106. Sales and Sales Management (4)
Examines the sales function from strategic competitive importance to the firm to required direct sales skills of individual salespersons. Major subject areas covered are the sales process, recruitment and training, organization and focus, “territories,” evaluation and compensation. Prerequisites: MGT 100 or MGT 103.

MGT 107. Consumer Behavior (4)
The course identifies the factors that influence the selection and usage of products and services. Students will be introduced to problems/decisions that include evaluating behavior, understanding the consumers’ decision process, and strategies to create desirable consumer behavior. Prerequisites: MGT 103.

MGT 108R. Applied Market Research (4)
The business world revolves around managerial decisions, and those ought to be data driven. In this course we will learn about planning, implementing, and analyzing market research; synthesizing multi-methods research; and presenting market research results by actually doing it. We will learn how to plan and conduct interviews; how to design, execute, and analyze surveys; and how to employ cutting-edge tools such as adaptive conjoint analysis to quantify attribute levels and trade-offs. This course is a distance education course. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MGT 109. Topics in Marketing (4)
Introduces advanced topics of special interest in marketing. Topics may include advertising, consumer behavior, pricing, product life cycles, etc. This course may also cover the unique demands of innovation-driven, biotech, and high-technology markets. Prerequisites: MGT 100 or MGT 103, upper-division standing.

MGT 112. Global Business Strategy (4)
Will examine the advantages and complications of the multinational organization with emphasis on translating marketing, financing, and operating plans in light of geographical, cultural, and legal differences across the globe. Will also cover organizational considerations for transglobal management. Prerequisites: MGT 100 or MGT 103 and MGT 180 or MGT 181 or MGT 187, upper-division standing.

MGT 117. Business Law (4)
Focuses on elements of business law that are essential for the basic management of business operations. Topics include the law of contracts, sales, partnership, corporations, bankruptcy, and securities. Students will also gain knowledge of intellectual property law and dispute resolution. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MGT 119. Topics in Business (4)
Introduces advanced topics of special interest in business and addresses the new frontiers in the industry. Topics may include intellectual property, consumer behavior, market research, analytics, and spreadsheet modeling, etc. May be taken for credit three times. Instructional methods include face-to-face lecture, case presentation, assigned reading, and group discussion. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MGT 121A. Innovation to Market A (4)
Consider new project concepts. Discern market needs, competitive environment, and determine “go to market” strategy. Research potential markets, customers, partners, and competitors. Consider price versus attributes, alternative distribution channels, gaining unfair advantage. Examine the need and structure of a start-up team. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MGT 121B. Innovation to Market B (4)
Build a business plan. Establish intellectual property rights. Provide financial projections and determine financing needs. Explore investment sourcing, business valuation, and harvesting opportunities. Determine operational plans and key employee requirements. Prerequisites: MGT 181 or MGT 187 and MGT 111 or MGT 121A, upper-division standing.

MGT 127. Innovation and Technology Strategy (4)
Outlines frameworks and tools for formulating strategy to manage technology and think strategically in fast-moving industries (e.g., high tech, biotech, and clean tech). Students will gain insights into technology, strategy, and markets, especially how disruptive technologies create opportunities for start-ups and transform established firms, and how technology firms achieve competitive advantage through tech-enabled innovations. Illustrated by case studies on cutting-edge start-ups industry leaders. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MGT 128. Business Innovation and Growth (4)
Business innovation is accelerating, and the service sector is the fastest-growing sector of the economy. This course helps students prepare for careers as businesses transition to a service economy and help them identify career and entrepreneurial opportunities. Students gain understanding of the design and innovation approaches in businesses and the service industry. The course also addresses trends of businesses services getting digitized and technology-enabled for growth, productivity, and scalability. Credit not allowed for MGT 128 and MGT 128R. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MGT 128R. Business Innovation and Growth (4)
This course is a gentle and technology-friendly introduction to business innovation, growth, and entrepreneurship. The course introduces students to the economic fundamentals that lead to business scalability and sustainability. Topics of operations, supply, product, and project management are also introduced. Students gain understanding of the design and innovation approaches in business and entrepreneurship with exercises and a digital simulation. Credit not allowed for MGT 128R and MGT 128. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MGT 129. Topics in Entrepreneurship (2)
Introduces advanced topics of special interest in entrepreneurship. Examples of course topics include (but are not limited to) venture capital funding process, entrepreneurial business development and marketing, workplace climate and morale, and developing a capable workforce. Instructional methods include face-to-face lecture, case presentation, assigned reading and group discussion. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MGT 131A. Intermediate Accounting A (4)
Preparation and interpretation of accounting information under both FASB and IASB guidelines pertaining to revenue and expense recognition, receivables, and inventories. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and MGT 5 and either MGT 4 or ECON 4.

MGT 131B. Intermediate Accounting B (4)
Preparation and interpretation of accounting information under both FASB and IASB guidelines pertaining to property plant and equipment, leases, intangible assets, investments, long-term debt, and stockholders’ equity. Prerequisites: MGT 131A.

MGT 132. Auditing (4)
Theory and practice of the attest process; planning and implementing the audit of the financial statements and internal control over financial reporting to ensure compliance with applicable requirements. Prerequisites: MGT 131B.

MGT 133. Advanced Cost Accounting (4)
Covers cost accumulation and analysis, for both manufacturing cost components and service activities, budgeting and cost projections, cost variance analysis, relevant costs, and capital investment analysis. Prerequisites: MGT 131B.

MGT 134. Federal Taxation—Individuals (4)
Covers theory and practical application of federal income tax regulations for individuals pertaining to gross income, adjusted gross income, itemized deductions, business operations, passive activities, property transactions, deferred income recognition, and reporting standards. Prerequisites: MGT 131B.

MGT 135. Federal Taxation—Companies (4)
Covers the theory and practical application of federal income tax regulations for corporations and other enterprises pertaining to formulations, annual operations, distributions, liquidations, reorganizations, affiliations, and reporting standards. Prerequisites: MGT 131B.

MGT 136. Advanced Accounting (4)
Covers accounting topics related to consolidated financial statements, variable interest entities, foreign currency translation, segment reporting, and business combinations. Prerequisites: MGT 132.

MGT 137. Financial Statement Analysis (4)
Examines tools and techniques to analyze a firm’s financial position and performance. This course combines both accounting and finance in a practical framework for debt and equity valuation methods from both a conceptual and practical framework. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and MGT 5 and either MGT 4 or ECON 4.

MGT 138. Information Technology and Accounting (4)
This course provides an introduction to the role and use of models and modeling in managerial decision-making. Students will gain hands-on experience in evaluating accounting data using Microsoft Excel. Content includes creating data boxes in financial accounting, using multiple sheets with formulas, preparing professional quality financial reports, and creating graphs to interpret business results. Students will also explore the utility of QuickBooks and the functionality for small businesses. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MGT 139. Accounting Information Systems (4)
Develop an understanding of transaction cycles (e.g., sales order and purchase order processing) with a focus on processing steps, internal controls, and data used. Gain hands-on experience developing flowcharts, processing transactions in a manual accounting information system, and analyzing transaction data using Microsoft Excel and other tools. Prerequisites: MGT 131B and upper-division standing.

MGT 143. Forensic Accounting (4)
Course covers key forensic accounting concepts including fraudulent financial reporting, money laundering, business valuation, and litigation support. Learning objectives are the application of analytical accounting and communication skills in identifying and presenting financial issues in both criminal and civil litigation. Prerequisites: MGT 131B and upper-division standing.

MGT 146. Ethics in Accounting (4)
This course will focus on three major components: 1) what matters (the purpose of ethics in the accounting profession); 2) why ethics matter (the reasons, skills, and abilities that make a difference); and 3) how a professional “walks the walk.” The course provides students with the opportunity to gain knowledge, awareness, and recognition of ethical terms, theories, codes, etc. Students will be given the opportunity to practice making choices and exercise professional judgment. Prerequisites: MGT 132, upper-division standing.

MGT 147. Not-For-Profit and Government Accounting (4)
Addresses issues faced in government and not-for-profit accounting. Students will gain insight into how and why these issues may have been resolved either similarly or differently from the for-profit business sector. Focus will be placed on how revenue and expense recognition, asset and liability valuation, the scope of the reporting entity, reporting cash flows, etc., differ in comparison to for-profit business accounting. Prerequisites: MGT 131B, upper-division standing.

MGT 148. Mergers and Acquisitions (4)
This course helps students understand the complexities involved in international deals. Examines current financial reporting practices for business entities engaged in international activities. Focuses on policy issues such as foreign currency translation, global inflation, transfer pricing, complying with reporting requirements, taxation, and international accounting and auditing standards. Prerequisites: MGT 45 or MGT 5 and ECON 4 or MGT 4 or MGT 45.

MGT 149. Topics in Accounting (4)
Introduces advanced topics of special interest in accounting. Examples of course topics include (but are not limited to) corporate valuation and forecasting, global taxation and business strategy, current issues in the practice and regulation of auditing. May be taken for credit two times for a maximum of eight credits if the topics are substantially different. Prerequisites: MGT 131B, upper-division standing.

MGT 151R. Business Analytics (4)
This course focuses on the concept of data analytics, and the convergence of data and business. From a practical standpoint, the course focuses on solving business problems by examining industry data, machine learning, statistics, and various forms of data analytics concepts. The fundamental goal of the course is to ensure students learn and understand fundamental interconnections and practical coding applications within the field of data analytics. This course is a distance education course. Prerequisites: MATH 10A or MATH 18 or MATH 20A or MATH 31AH and BENG 100 or BIEB 100 or COGS 14B or ECE 109 or ECON 120A or MAE 108 or MATH 11 or MATH 180A or MATH 180B or MATH 181A or MATH 183 or MATH 186 or MGT 3 or PSYC 60 or SIO 187.

MGT 153. Information Technology in Business Analytics (4)
This course is designed to help a business manager use data to make good decisions in complex decision-making situations. Students will learn core business analytics concepts and skills including Excel, relational databases and Structured Query Language (SQL), principles of effective data visualizations and interactive data visualization (e.g., Tableau), and data preprocessing and regression analysis using data analytics programming (e.g., Python). Prerequisites: MATH 10A or MATH 18 or MATH 20A or MATH 31AH and BENG 100 or BIEB 100 or COGS 14B or ECE 109 or ECON 120A or MAE 108 or MATH 11 or MATH 180A or MATH 181A or MATH 183 or MATH 186 or MGT 3 or PSYC 60 or SIO 187, upper-division standing.

MGT 154. Advanced Business Research (4)
When considering complex business problems, research is often undertaken as a means of aiding decision-making. This course gives an in-depth look at the business research process, including methods of qualitative and quantitative research. Students learn about the design and execution of business analytics (including common descriptive and predictive models), and how models are selected, executed, and evaluated, with focus on extracting impactful information to aid in making informed decisions. Prerequisites: MGT 153, department approval required, upper-division standing.

MGT 157. Real Estate Securitization (4)
Residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities markets and the market for structured real estate debt; the estimation of prices, yields, and various measures of investment performance; creating and structuring security issues; legal, regulatory, and institutional issues; derivative products (CDOs, CDSs, options, futures, etc.); and current political, economic, and policy issues. Prerequisites: MGT 181 and upper-division standing.

MGT 158. Real Estate and the Tech Sector (4)
Introduction to the emerging real estate tech sector; newly available datasets and technologies are transforming the real estate sector; introduction of quantitative methods for analyzing real estate and urban trends; utilizing large datasets and software in making optimal decisions from the perspective of buyers, sellers, real estate agents and brokers, developers, and regulators. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MGT 160. Experiments in Firms (4)
An understanding of how to design and run a good experiment will position students at the cutting edge of decision-making in business and policy. Students will develop their own experiments that can be implemented online and in organizations. Students will learn to distinguish between a correlation and a causal effect; incorporate behavioral economics into experimental designs; randomize, analyze, and critique experimental interventions; and address organizational concerns about experimentation. Prerequisites: (BENG 100 or BIEB 100 or COGS 14B or ECE 109 or ECON 120A or MAE 108 or MATH 11 or MATH 180A or MATH 181A or MATH 183 or MATH 186 or MGT 3 or PSYC 60 or SIO 187) and (MATH 10A or MATH 18 or MATH 20A or MATH 31AH).

MGT 162. Negotiations (4)
This course takes a decision-making orientation to negotiation. The course will build cumulatively from (seemingly) simple negotiations to those of greater complexity. These structured negotiation exercises are used to isolate and emphasize specific analytic points and essential skills. Cases and readings should help the student to integrate the analysis as well as to develop intuition about more complex negotiations. Students will not receive credit for both MGT 162 and MGT 162R. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MGT 162R. Negotiations (4)
This course takes a decision-making orientation to negotiation. The course will build cumulatively from (seemingly) simple negotiations to those of greater complexity. These structured negotiation exercises are used to isolate and emphasize specific analytic points and essential skills. Cases and readings should help the student integrate the analysis as well as to develop intuition about more complex negotiations. Students will not receive credit for both MGT 162R and MGT 162. This course is a distance education course. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MGT 164. Business and Organizational Leadership (4)
Students will study alternative organizational structures—their stakeholders and corporate cultures, and their use in meeting strategic enterprise priorities facing a company. This course provides students with insights into motivational factors, communications networks, organizational cultures, and alternative leadership styles. The concept of change management and its challenges is also studied along with power and influence. Students may not receive credit for MGT 164 and MGT 164GS. Course previously listed as: Organizational Leadership. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MGT 164GS. Business and Organizational Leadership (4)
Students will study alternative organizational structures—their stakeholders and corporate cultures and their use in meeting various strategic priorities facing a company. This course provides students with insights into motivational factors, communications networks, organizational cultures, and alternative leadership styles. The concept of change management and its challenges is also studied along with power and influence. Students must submit applications to the International Center Programs Abroad Office and be accepted into the Global Seminar Program. Students may not receive credit for MGT 164 and MGT 164GS. Course previously listed as: Organizational Leadership. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Program or materials fees may apply.

MGT 166. Business Ethics and Corporate Responsibility (4)
Will cover ethical conduct issues for leaders from a wide array of organizations and industries including consideration of differences among global trading partners. The issues impacting corporate responsibility will be examined as will full-cycle cost analysis of products and services. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MGT 167. Social Entrepreneurship (4)
Social entrepreneurs create innovative solutions to solve challenging social and environmental issues affecting the world around them. In this course, students will learn how to apply entrepreneurial business and innovative skills to effectively tackle global issues impacting society such as environmental degradation, rural health care availability, educational improvements in economically disadvantaged regions of the world, famine in an era of obesity, and clean water development. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MGT 171. Operations Management (4)
Operations management (OM) involves the systematic design, execution, and improvement of business processes, projects, and partner relationships. This course goes beyond cost minimization and addresses issues that firms large and small must confront in their journey toward sustained scalability, growth, and profitability. Also examines human factors such as psychological contract, team management, empowerment, employee-initiated process improvements, morale, motivation, rewards, and incentives. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Students will not receive credit for both MGT 171 and MGT 171R.

MGT 171R. Operations Management (4)
Operations management (OM) involves the systematic design, execution, and improvement of business processes, projects, and partner relationships. This course goes beyond cost minimization and addresses issues that firms large and small must confront in their journey toward sustained scalability, growth, and profitability. Also examines human factors such as psychological contract, team management, empowerment, employee initiated process improvements, morale, motivation, rewards, and incentives. Students will not receive credit for both MGT 171R and MGT 171. This course is a distance education course.

MGT 172. Business Project Management (4)
Addresses effective practices for management of business projects. Includes both project management processes—scheduling, milestone setting, resource allocation, budgeting, risk mitigation—and human capital management—communication, teamwork, leadership. Also considers requirements for effectively working across functional and organizational boundaries. Students will not receive credit for both MGT 172 and MGT 172R. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MGT 172R. Business Project Management (4)
Addresses effective practices for management of business projects. Includes both project management processes—scheduling, milestone setting, resource allocation, budgeting, risk mitigation—and human capital management—communication, teamwork, leadership. Also considers requirements for effectively working across functional and organizational boundaries. Students will not receive credit for both MGT 172 and MGT 172R. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MGT 173. Project Management: Health Services (4)
This course covers efficient techniques for managing health services projects, including both the technical aspects of project management as well as the human-capital management issues associated with blending administrative and technical staff with health-care professionals. Topics include scheduling methods, milestone setting, governmental regulations, resource allocation, interpersonal skills, and performing research and development projects—all with a health services focus. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MGT 175. Supply Chain Management (4)
Supply chain management involves the flows of materials and information that contribute value to a product, from the source of raw materials to end customers. This course explains how supply chains work and describes the major challenges in managing an efficient supply chain. Covers various strategic and tactical supply chain issues such as distribution strategy, information sharing strategy, outsourcing, procurement (including e-markets), product design, virtual integration, and risk management. Credit is not allowed for both MGT 174 and MGT 175. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MGT 176. Strategic Cost Management (4)
Covers a process to conduct and create a professional supply market analysis report, starting from data sources and processes to develop cost models. Includes a structured process to create and implement supplier selection and qualification as well as cost management strategies. Students will sharpen analytical skills, think creatively outside the box, and be able to sell their strategy by studying real-life examples of how these concepts have been implemented at various Fortune 100 companies. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MGT 177. Analytics and Spreadsheet Modeling in Supply Chain Management (4)
In today’s global economy, competition is not firm against firm, but rather supply chain against supply chain. Companies utilize analytics (i.e., the use of data, together with statistical and quantitative models, to make better, data-driven business decisions) to gain advantage in their supply chain management. Course covers the use of data analytics and spreadsheet modeling in decision-making involved in supply chain management, including logistics, facility management, fulfillment, and pricing. Prerequisites: MGT 153, upper-division standing.

MGT 179. Topics in Supply Chain Management (2)
Introduces advanced topics of special interest in supply chain. Students will develop the ability to apply the supply chain management concepts that they have learned to real-life situations. May be taken for credit two times if topics are substantially different. Prerequisites: MGT 175.

MGT 180. Business Finance (4)
This course provides an introduction to the fundamental concepts in corporate finance. Topics include discounted cash flow, capital budgeting, bond and stock valuation, portfolio theory, market efficiency, the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), the determinants of capital structure and options. We will seek a balance between theoretical paradigms, the empirical facts, and their applicability to real-world issues. Emphasis will be placed on general principles and problem solving. Students will not receive credit for both MGT 180 and MGT 180R. Prerequisites: ECE 109 or ECON 100A or ECON 120A or MAE 108 or MATH 180A or MATH 183 or MATH 186.

MGT 180R. Business Finance (4)
This course provides an introduction to the fundamental concepts in corporate finance. Topics include discounted cash flow, capital budgeting, bond and stock valuation, portfolio theory, market efficiency, the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), the determinants of capital structure, and options. We will seek a balance between theoretical paradigms, the empirical facts, and their applicability to real world issues. Emphasis will be placed on general principles and problem-solving. This course is a distance education course. Students will not receive credit for both MGT 180R and MGT 180. Prerequisites: ECE 109 or ECON 100A or ECON 120A or MAE 108 or MATH 180A or MATH 183 or MATH 186.

MGT 181. Enterprise Finance (4)
Will cover debt and equity financing of the enterprise, the role of commercial banks, venture firms, and investment banks; along with enterprise valuation, cash flow management, capital expenditure decisions, return on investment, economic value add, and foreign currency translation. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and (MATH 10A or MATH 20A or MGT 3) and (MGT 5 or MGT 45) and (MGT 4 or MGT 45 or ECON 4).

MGT 183. Financial Investments (4)
Examines financial theory and empirical evidence useful for making investment decisions. Portfolio theory, equilibrium models, and market efficiency are examined for stock securities and fixed income instruments. Risk adjusted ROIs for capital investments’ impact on stock prices and free options will also be studied. Prerequisites: ECON 173B or MGT 180 or MGT 181 or MGT 187.

MGT 184. Money and Banking (4) 
Focuses on role of financial institutions, implications for firm financing and valuation as well as the Federal Reserve, financial regulation, the money supply process, and monetary policy. Mechanisms through which monetary policy affects businesses and credit channels will be covered. Prerequisites: ECON 173B or MGT 180 or MGT 181 or MGT 187.

MGT 185. Investment Banking (4)
This course provides students with an overview of the investment banking industry, including IPOs, equity offerings, debt offerings, valuation, mergers and acquisition, private equity, asset securitization, prime brokerage, sales and trading, and market making. Emphasis of the class will be on traditional corporate finance, which includes equity and debt offerings as well as mergers and acquisitions. Prerequisites: ECON 173B or MGT 180 or MGT 181 or MGT 187 and upper-division standing.

MGT 187. New Venture Finance (4)
Taking a global perspective, this course examines how innovation is funded and the financial tools necessary over the life cycle of a new venture—development, growth, maturity, and exit. Students will learn to perform financial analysis to determine the feasibility of financing new, transformed, and growing ventures, whether foreign or domestic. The course will also cover term sheets, valuation methods, and the role of private equity investors—angels, VCs, and vendors. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

MGT 189. Topics in Finance (4)
Introduces advanced topics of special interest in finance. Topics may include behavioral finance, financial derivatives, portfolio management, fixed income securities, asset pricing theory, commercial banking, etc. May be taken for credit up to three times. Prerequisites: MGT 180 or MGT 181 or MGT 187, upper-division standing.

MGT 198. Directed Group Study (4)
A small group undertaking, on a topic or in a field not included in the regular curriculum, by special arrangement with a faculty member. Prerequisites: instructor consent and department approval.

MGT 199. Directed Independent Study (4)
Directed individual study or research by special arrangement and under supervision of a faculty member. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and department approval; approved Special Studies form.

MATH 2. Introduction to College Mathematics (4)
A highly adaptive course designed to build on students’ strengths while increasing overall mathematical understanding and skill. This multimodality course will focus on several topics of study designed to develop conceptual understanding and mathematical relevance: linear relationships; exponents and polynomials; rational expressions and equations; models of quadratic and polynomial functions and radical equations; exponential and logarithmic functions; and geometry and trigonometry. Workload credit only—not for baccalaureate credit. Prerequisites: Math Placement Exam qualifying score.

MATH 3B. Foundations of Precalculus (4)
Introduction to functions and their properties. Polynomial and rational functions. Exponential and logarithmic functions. Trigonometric functions and their properties. Prerequisites: Math Placement Exam qualifying score, or MATH 2.

MATH 3C. Precalculus (4)
Functions and their graphs. Linear and polynomial functions, zeroes, inverse functions, exponential and logarithmic, trigonometric functions and their inverses. Emphasis on understanding algebraic, numerical, and graphical. (No credit given if taken after MATH 4C, 1A/10A, or 2A/20A.) Three or more years of high school mathematics or equivalent recommended. Prerequisites: Math Placement Exam qualifying score or MATH 3B.

MATH 4C. Precalculus for Science and Engineering (4)
Review of polynomials. Graphing functions and relations: graphing rational functions, effects of linear changes of coordinates. Circular functions and right triangle trigonometry. Reinforcement of function concept: exponential, logarithmic, and trigonometric functions. Vectors. Conic sections. Polar coordinates. (No credit given if taken after MATH 1A/10A or 2A/20A. Two units of credit given if taken after MATH 3C.) Three or more years of high school mathematics or equivalent recommended. Prerequisites: Math Placement Exam qualifying score, or MATH 3C, or ACT Math score of 25 or higher, or AP Calculus AB score (or subscore) of 2.

MATH 10A. Calculus I (4)
Differential calculus of functions of one variable, with applications. Functions, graphs, continuity, limits, derivatives, tangent lines, optimization problems. (No credit given if taken after or concurrent with MATH 20A.) Prerequisites: Math Placement Exam qualifying score, or AP Calculus AB score of 2, or SAT II Math Level 2 score of 600 or higher, or MATH 3C, or MATH 4C.

MATH 10B. Calculus II (4)
Integral calculus of functions of one variable, with applications. Antiderivatives, definite integrals, the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, methods of integration, areas and volumes, separable differential equations. (No credit given if taken after or concurrent with MATH 20B.) Prerequisites: AP Calculus AB score of 3, 4, or 5 (or equivalent AB subscore on BC exam), or MATH 10A, or MATH 20A.

MATH 10C. Calculus III (4)
Introduction to functions of more than one variable. Vector geometry, partial derivatives, velocity and acceleration vectors, optimization problems. (No credit given if taken after or concurrent with 20C.) Prerequisites: AP Calculus BC score of 3, 4, or 5, or MATH 10B, or MATH 20B.

MATH 11. Calculus-Based Introductory Probability and Statistics (5)
Events and probabilities, conditional probability, Bayes’ formula. Discrete and continuous random variables: mean, variance; binomial, Poisson distributions, normal, uniform, exponential distributions, central limit theorem. Sample statistics, confidence intervals, hypothesis testing, regression. Applications. Introduction to software for probabilistic and statistical analysis. Emphasis on connections between probability and statistics, numerical results of real data, and techniques of data analysis. Prerequisites: AP Calculus BC score of 3, 4, or 5, or MATH 10B or MATH 20B.

MATH 15A. Introduction to Discrete Mathematics (4)
Basic discrete mathematical structure: sets, relations, functions, sequences, equivalence relations, partial orders, and number systems. Methods of reasoning and proofs: propositional logic, predicate logic, induction, recursion, and pigeonhole principle. Infinite sets and diagonalization. Basic counting techniques; permutation and combinations. Applications will be given to digital logic design, elementary number theory, design of programs, and proofs of program correctness. Students who have completed MATH 109 may not receive credit for MATH 15A. Credit not offered for both MATH 15A and CSE 20. Equivalent to CSE 20. Prerequisites: CSE 8B or CSE 11. Prerequisite courses must be completed with a grade of C– or better.

MATH 18. Linear Algebra (4)
Matrix algebra, Gaussian elimination, determinants. Linear and affine subspaces, bases of Euclidean spaces. Eigenvalues and eigenvectors, quadratic forms, orthogonal matrices, diagonalization of symmetric matrices. Applications. Computing symbolic and graphical solutions using MATLAB. Students may not receive credit for both MATH 18 and 31AH. Prerequisites: Math Placement Exam qualifying score, or AP Calculus AB score of 3 (or equivalent AB subscore on BC exam), or SAT II Math Level 2 score of 650 or higher, or MATH 4C, or MATH 10A, or MATH 20A. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 20A. Calculus for Science and Engineering (4)
Foundations of differential and integral calculus of one variable. Functions, graphs, continuity, limits, derivative, tangent line. Applications with algebraic, exponential, logarithmic, and trigonometric functions. Introduction to the integral. (Two credits given if taken after MATH 1A/10A and no credit given if taken after MATH 1B/10B or MATH 1C/10C. Formerly numbered MATH 2A.) Prerequisites: Math Placement Exam qualifying score, or AP Calculus AB score of 3 (or equivalent AB subscore on BC exam), or SAT II MATH 2C score of 650 or higher, or MATH 4C or MATH 10A.

MATH 20B. Calculus for Science and Engineering (4)
Integral calculus of one variable and its applications, with exponential, logarithmic, hyperbolic, and trigonometric functions. Methods of integration. Infinite series. Polar coordinates in the plane and complex exponentials. (Two units of credits given if taken after MATH 1B/10B or MATH 1C/10C.) Prerequisites: AP Calculus AB score of 4 or 5, or AP Calculus BC score of 3, or MATH 20A with a grade of C– or better, or MATH 10B with a grade of C– or better, or MATH 10C with a grade of C– or better.

MATH 20C. Calculus and Analytic Geometry for Science and Engineering (4)
Vector geometry, vector functions and their derivatives. Partial differentiation. Maxima and minima. Double integration. (Two units of credit given if taken after MATH 10C. Credit not offered for both MATH 20C and 31BH. Formerly numbered MATH 21C.) Prerequisites: AP Calculus BC score of 4 or 5, or MATH 20B with a grade of C– or better.

MATH 20D. Introduction to Differential Equations (4)
Ordinary differential equations: exact, separable, and linear; constant coefficients, undetermined coefficients, variations of parameters. Systems. Series solutions. Laplace transforms. Techniques for engineering sciences. Computing symbolic and graphical solutions using MATLAB. (Formerly numbered MATH 21D.) May be taken as repeat credit for MATH 21D. Prerequisites: MATH 20C (or MATH 21C) or MATH 31BH with a grade of C– or better.

MATH 20E. Vector Calculus (4)
Change of variable in multiple integrals, Jacobian, Line integrals, Green’s theorem. Vector fields, gradient fields, divergence, curl. Spherical/cylindrical coordinates. Taylor series in several variables. Surface integrals, Stoke’s theorem. Gauss’ theorem. Conservative fields. Prerequisites: MATH 18 or MATH 20F or MATH 31AH and MATH 20C (or MATH 21C) or MATH 31BH with a grade of C– or better.

MATH 31AH. Honors Linear Algebra (4)
First quarter of three-quarter honors integrated linear algebra/multivariable calculus sequence for well-prepared students. Topics include real/complex number systems, vector spaces, linear transformations, bases and dimension, change of basis, eigenvalues, eigenvectors, diagonalization. (Credit not offered for both MATH 31AH and 20F.) Prerequisites: AP Calculus BC score of 5 or consent of instructor.

MATH 31BH. Honors Multivariable Calculus (4)
Second quarter of three-quarter honors integrated linear algebra/multivariable calculus sequence for well-prepared students. Topics include derivative in several variables, Jacobian matrices, extrema and constrained extrema, integration in several variables. (Credit not offered for both MATH 31BH and 20C.) Prerequisites: MATH 31AH with a grade of B– or better, or consent of instructor.

MATH 31CH. Honors Vector Calculus (4)
Third quarter of honors integrated linear algebra/multivariable calculus sequence for well-prepared students. Topics include change of variables formula, integration of differential forms, exterior derivative, generalized Stoke’s theorem, conservative vector fields, potentials. Prerequisites: MATH 31BH with a grade of B– or better, or consent of instructor.

MATH 87. First-year Student Seminar (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students. Prerequisites: none.

MATH 95. Introduction to Teaching Math (2)
(Cross-listed with EDS 30.) Revisit students’ learning difficulties in mathematics in more depth to prepare students to make meaningful observations of how K–12 teachers deal with these difficulties. Explore how instruction can use students’ knowledge to pose problems that stimulate students’ intellectual curiosity. Prerequisites: none.

MATH 96. Putnam Seminar (1)
Students will develop skills in analytical thinking as they solve and present solutions to challenging mathematical problems in preparation for the William Lowell Putnam Mathematics Competition, a national undergraduate mathematics examination held each year. Students must sit for at least one half of the Putnam exam (given the first Saturday in December) to receive a passing grade. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit up to four times. Prerequisites: AP Calculus AB score of 4 or more, or AP Calculus BC score of 3 or more, or MATH 20A.

MATH 99R. Independent Study in Mathematics (1)
Independent study or research under direction of a member of the faculty. Prerequisites: Must be of first-year standing and a Regent’s Scholar.

MATH 100A. Abstract Algebra I (4)
First course in a rigorous three-quarter introduction to the methods and basic structures of higher algebra. Topics include groups, subgroups and factor groups, homomorphisms, rings, fields. (Students may not receive credit for both MATH 100A and MATH 103A.) Prerequisites: MATH 31CH or MATH 109 or consent of instructor.

MATH 100B. Abstract Algebra II (4)
Second course in a rigorous three-quarter introduction to the methods and basic structures of higher algebra. Topics include rings (especially polynomial rings) and ideals, unique factorization, fields; linear algebra from perspective of linear transformations on vector spaces, including inner product spaces, determinants, diagonalization. (Students may not receive credit for both MATH 100B and MATH 103B.) Prerequisites: MATH 100A or consent of instructor.

MATH 100C. Abstract Algebra III (4)
Third course in a rigorous three-quarter introduction to the methods and basic structures of higher algebra. Topics include linear transformations, including Jordan canonical form and rational canonical form; Galois theory, including the insolvability of the quintic. Prerequisites: MATH 100B or consent of instructor.

MATH 102. Applied Linear Algebra (4)
Second course in linear algebra from a computational yet geometric point of view. Elementary Hermitian matrices, Schur’s theorem, normal matrices, and quadratic forms. Moore-Penrose generalized inverse and least square problems. Vector and matrix norms. Characteristic and singular values. Canonical forms. Determinants and multilinear algebra. Prerequisites: MATH 18 or MATH 20F or MATH 31AH and MATH 20C. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 103A. Modern Algebra I (4)
First course in a two-quarter introduction to abstract algebra with some applications. Emphasis on group theory. Topics include definitions and basic properties of groups, properties of isomorphisms, subgroups. (Students may not receive credit for both MATH 100A and MATH 103A.) Prerequisites: MATH 31CH or MATH 109 or consent of instructor.

MATH 103B. Modern Algebra II (4)
Second course in a two-quarter introduction to abstract algebra with some applications. Emphasis on rings and fields. Topics include definitions and basic properties of rings, fields, and ideals, homomorphisms, irreducibility of polynomials. (Students may not receive credit for both MATH 100B and MATH 103B.) Prerequisites: MATH 103A or MATH 100A or consent of instructor.

MATH 104A. Number Theory I (4)
Elementary number theory with applications. Topics include unique factorization, irrational numbers, residue systems, congruences, primitive roots, reciprocity laws, quadratic forms, arithmetic functions, partitions, Diophantine equations, distribution of primes. Applications include fast Fourier transform, signal processing, codes, cryptography. Prerequisites: MATH 100B or MATH 103B. Students who have not completed the listed prerequisite(s) may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 104B. Number Theory II (4)
Topics in number theory such as finite fields, continued fractions, Diophantine equations, character sums, zeta and theta functions, prime number theorem, algebraic integers, quadratic and cyclotomic fields, prime ideal theory, class number, quadratic forms, units, Diophantine approximation, p-adic numbers, elliptic curves. Prerequisites: MATH 104A or consent of instructor.

MATH 105. Basic Number Theory (4)
The course will cover the basic arithmetic properties of the integers, with applications to Diophantine equations and elementary Diophantine approximation theory. Prerequisites: MATH 31CH or MATH 109. Students who have not completed the listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 106. Introduction to Algebraic Geometry (4)
Plane curves, Bezout’s theorem, singularities of plane curves. Affine and projective spaces, affine and projective varieties. Examples of all the above. Instructor may choose to include some commutative algebra or some computational examples. Prerequisites: MATH 100B or MATH 103B. Students who have not completed the listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 109. Mathematical Reasoning (4)
This course uses a variety of topics in mathematics to introduce the students to rigorous mathematical proof, emphasizing quantifiers, induction, negation, proof by contradiction, naive set theory, equivalence relations and epsilon-delta proofs. Required of all departmental majors. Prerequisites: MATH 18 or MATH 20F or MATH 31AH, and MATH 20C. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 110. Introduction to Partial Differential Equations (4)
An introduction to partial differential equations focusing on equations in two variables. Topics include the heat and wave equation on an interval, Laplace’s equation on rectangular and circular domains, separation of variables, boundary conditions and eigenfunctions, introduction to Fourier series, software methods for solving equations. Formerly MATH 110A. (Students may not receive credit for MATH 110 and MATH 110A.) Prerequisites: MATH 18 or MATH 20F or MATH 31AH and MATH 20D and MATH 20E or MATH 31CH. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 111A. Mathematical Modeling I (4)
An introduction to mathematical modeling in the physical and social sciences. Topics vary, but have included mathematical models for epidemics, chemical reactions, political organizations, magnets, economic mobility, and geographical distributions of species. May be taken for credit two times when topics change. Prerequisites: MATH 20D, MATH 18 or MATH 20F or MATH 31AH, and MATH 109 or MATH 31CH. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 111B. Mathematical Modeling II (4)
Continued study on mathematical modeling in the physical and social sciences, using advanced techniques that will expand upon the topics selected and further the mathematical theory presented in MATH 111A. Prerequisites: MATH 111A or consent of instructor.

MATH 112A. Introduction to Mathematical Biology I (4)
Part one of a two-course introduction to the use of mathematical theory and techniques in analyzing biological problems. Topics include differential equations, dynamical systems, and probability theory applied to a selection of biological problems from population dynamics, biochemical reactions, biological oscillators, gene regulation, molecular interactions, and cellular function. May be coscheduled with MATH 212A. Recommended preparation: MATH 130 and MATH 180A. Prerequisites: MATH 11 or MATH 180A or MATH 183 or MATH 186, and MATH 18 or MATH 31AH, and MATH 20D, and BILD 1. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 112B. Introduction to Mathematical Biology II (4)
Part two of an introduction to the use of mathematical theory and techniques in analyzing biological problems. Topics include partial differential equations and stochastic processes applied to a selection of biological problems, especially those involving spatial movement, such as molecular diffusion, bacterial chemotaxis, tumor growth, and biological patterns. May be coscheduled with MATH 212B. Recommended preparation: MATH 180B. Prerequisites: MATH 112A and MATH 110 and MATH 180A. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 114. Introduction to Computational Stochastics (4)
Topics include random number generators, variance reduction, Monte Carlo (including Markov Chain Monte Carlo) simulation, and numerical methods for stochastic differential equations. Methods will be illustrated on applications in biology, physics, and finance. May be coscheduled with MATH 214. Recommended preparation: CSE 5A, CSE 8A, CSE 11, or ECE 15. Students should complete a computer programming course before enrolling in MATH 114. Prerequisites: MATH 180A. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 120A. Elements of Complex Analysis (4)
Complex numbers and functions. Analytic functions, harmonic functions, elementary conformal mappings. Complex integration. Power series. Cauchy’s theorem. Cauchy’s formula. Residue theorem. Prerequisites: MATH 20E or MATH 31CH, or consent of instructor.

MATH 120B. Applied Complex Analysis (4)
Applications of the residue theorem. Conformal mapping and applications to potential theory, flows, and temperature distributions. Fourier transformations. Laplace transformations, and applications to integral and differential equations. Selected topics such as Poisson’s formula, Dirichlet’s problem, Neumann’s problem, or special functions. Prerequisites: MATH 120A or consent of instructor.

MATH 121A. Foundations of Teaching and Learning Mathematics I (4)
(Cross-listed with EDS 121A.) Develop teachers’ knowledge base (knowledge of mathematics content, pedagogy, and student learning) in the context of advanced mathematics. This course builds on the previous courses where these components of knowledge were addressed exclusively in the context of high-school mathematics. Prerequisites: EDS 30/MATH 95, Calculus 10C or 20C.

MATH 121B. Foundations of Teaching and Learning Math II (4)
(Cross-listed with EDS 121B.) Examine how learning theories can consolidate observations about conceptual development with the individual student as well as the development of knowledge in the history of mathematics. Examine how teaching theories explain the effect of teaching approaches addressed in the previous courses. Prerequisites: EDS 121A/MATH 121A.

MATH 130. Differential Equations and Dynamical Systems (4)
An introduction to ordinary differential equations from the dynamical systems perspective. Topics include flows on lines and circles, two-dimensional linear systems and phase portraits, nonlinear planar systems, index theory, limit cycles, bifurcation theory, applications to biology, physics, and electrical engineering. Formerly MATH 130A. (Students may not receive credit for MATH 130 and MATH 130A.) Prerequisites: MATH 18 or MATH 20F or MATH 31AH and MATH 20D. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 140A. Foundations of Real Analysis I (4)
First course in a rigorous three-quarter sequence on real analysis. Topics include the real number system, basic topology, numerical sequences and series, continuity. (Students may not receive credit for both MATH 140A and MATH 142A.) Prerequisites: MATH 31CH or MATH 109. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 140B. Foundations of Real Analysis II (4)
Second course in a rigorous three-quarter sequence on real analysis. Topics include differentiation, the Riemann-Stieltjes integral, sequences and series of functions, power series, Fourier series, and special functions. (Students may not receive credit for both MATH 140B and MATH 142B.) Prerequisites: MATH 140A or consent of instructor.

MATH 140C. Foundations of Real Analysis III (4)
Third course in a rigorous three-quarter sequence on real analysis. Topics include differentiation of functions of several real variables, the implicit and inverse function theorems, the Lebesgue integral, infinite-dimensional normed spaces. Prerequisites: MATH 140B or consent of instructor.

MATH 142A. Introduction to Analysis I (4)
First course in an introductory two-quarter sequence on analysis. Topics include the real number system, numerical sequences and series, infinite limits, limits of functions, continuity, differentiation. Students may not receive credit for MATH 142A if taken after or concurrently with MATH 140A. Prerequisites: MATH 31CH or MATH 109. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 142B. Introduction to Analysis II (4)
Second course in an introductory two-quarter sequence on analysis. Topics include the Riemann integral, sequences and series of functions, uniform convergence, Taylor series, introduction to analysis in several variables. Students may not receive credit for MATH 142B if taken after or concurrently with MATH 140B. Prerequisites: MATH 142A or MATH 140A. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 144. Introduction to Fourier Analysis (4)
Rigorous introduction to the theory of Fourier series and Fourier transforms. Topics include basic properties of Fourier series, mean square and pointwise convergence, Hilbert spaces, applications of Fourier series, the Fourier transform on the real line, inversion formula, Plancherel formula, Poisson summation formula, Heisenberg uncertainty principle, applications of the Fourier transform. Prerequisites: MATH 140B or MATH 142B. Students who have not completed listed prerequisite(s) may enroll with the consent of instructor.

MATH 146. Analysis of Ordinary Differential Equations (4)
A rigorous introduction to systems of ordinary differential equations. Topics include linear systems, matrix diagonalization and canonical forms, matrix exponentials, nonlinear systems, existence and uniqueness of solutions, linearization, and stability. Prerequisites: MATH 140B or MATH 142B. Students who have not completed listed prerequisite(s) may enroll with the consent of instructor.

MATH 148. Analysis of Partial Differential Equations (4)
A rigorous introduction to partial differential equations. Topics include initial and boundary value problems; first order linear and quasilinear equations, method of characteristics; wave and heat equations on the line, half-line, and in space; separation of variables for heat and wave equations on an interval and for Laplace’s equation on rectangles and discs; eigenfunctions of the Laplacian and heat, wave, Poisson’s equations on bounded domains; and Green’s functions and distributions. Prerequisites: MATH 140B or MATH 142B. Students who have not completed listed prerequisite(s) may enroll with the consent of instructor.

MATH 150A. Differential Geometry (4)
Differential geometry of curves and surfaces. Gauss and mean curvatures, geodesics, parallel displacement, Gauss-Bonnet theorem. Prerequisites: MATH 20E or MATH 31CH and either MATH 18 or MATH 20F or MATH 31AH. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 150B. Calculus on Manifolds (4)
Calculus of functions of several variables, inverse function theorem. Further topics may include exterior differential forms, Stokes’ theorem, manifolds, Sard’s theorem, elements of differential topology, singularities of maps, catastrophes, further topics in differential geometry, topics in geometry of physics. Prerequisites: MATH 150A or consent of instructor.

MATH 152. Applicable Mathematics and Computing (4)
This course will give students experience in applying theory to real world applications such as internet and wireless communication problems. The course will incorporate talks by experts from industry and students will be helped to carry out independent projects. Topics include graph visualization, labelling, and embeddings, random graphs and randomized algorithms. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: MATH 20D and either MATH 18 or MATH 20F or MATH 31AH. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 153. Geometry for Secondary Teachers (4)
Two- and three-dimensional Euclidean geometry is developed from one set of axioms. Pedagogical issues will emerge from the mathematics and be addressed using current research in teaching and learning geometry. This course is designed for prospective secondary school mathematics teachers. Prerequisites: MATH 109 or MATH 31CH, or consent of instructor.

MATH 154. Discrete Mathematics and Graph Theory (4)
Basic concepts in graph theory, including trees, walks, paths, and connectivity, cycles, matching theory, vertex and edge-coloring, planar graphs, flows and combinatorial algorithms, covering Hall’s theorems, the max-flow min-cut theorem, Euler’s formula, and the travelling salesman problem. Credit not offered for MATH 154 if MATH 158 is previously taken. If MATH 154 and MATH 158 are concurrently taken, credit is only offered for MATH 158. Prerequisites: MATH 31CH or MATH 109. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 155A. Geometric Computer Graphics (4)
Bezier curves and control lines, de Casteljau construction for subdivision, elevation of degree, control points of Hermite curves, barycentric coordinates, rational curves. Programming knowledge recommended. (Students may not receive credit for both MATH 155A and CSE 167.) Prerequisites: MATH 18 or MATH 20F or MATH 31AH, and MATH 20C. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 155B. Topics in Computer Graphics (4)
Spline curves, NURBS, knot insertion, spline interpolation, illumination models, radiosity, and ray tracing. Prerequisites: MATH 155A. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 157. Introduction to Mathematical Software (4)
This course provides a hands-on introduction to the use of a variety of open-source mathematical software packages, as applied to a diverse range of topics within pure and applied mathematics. Most of these packages are built on the Python programming language, but experience with another common programming language is acceptable. All software will be accessed using the CoCalc web platform (http://cocalc.com), which provides a uniform interface through any web browser. Students will need to bring a laptop or tablet to lectures in order to participate in interactive presentations. Students should have exposure to one of the following programming languages: C, C++, Java, Python, R. Prerequisites: MATH 18 or MATH 20F or MATH 31AH and one of BILD 62, COGS 18 or CSE 5A or CSE 6R or CSE 8A or CSE 11 or DSC 10 or ECE 15 or ECE 143 or MATH 189. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 158. Extremal Combinatorics and Graph Theory (4)
Extremal combinatorics is the study of how large or small a finite set can be under combinatorial restrictions. We will give an introduction to graph theory, connectivity, coloring, factors, and matchings, extremal graph theory, Ramsey theory, extremal set theory, and an introduction to probabilistic combinatorics. Topics include Turan’s theorem, Ramsey’s theorem, Dilworth’s theorem, and Sperner’s theorem. Credit not offered for MATH 158 if MATH 154 was previously taken. If MATH 154 and MATH 158 are concurrently taken, credit is only offered for MATH 158. A strong performance in MATH 109 or MATH 31CH is recommended. Prerequisites: MATH 31CH or MATH 109. Students who have not completed the listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 160A. Elementary Mathematical Logic I (4)
An introduction to recursion theory, set theory, proof theory, model theory. Turing machines. Undecidability of arithmetic and predicate logic. Proof by induction and definition by recursion. Cardinal and ordinal numbers. Completeness and compactness theorems for propositional and predicate calculi. Prerequisites: MATH 100A, or MATH 103A, or MATH 140A, or consent of instructor.

MATH 160B. Elementary Mathematical Logic II (4)
A continuation of recursion theory, set theory, proof theory, model theory. Turing machines. Undecidability of arithmetic and predicate logic. Proof by induction and definition by recursion. Cardinal and ordinal numbers. Completeness and compactness theorems for propositional and predicate calculi. Prerequisites: MATH 160A or consent of instructor.

MATH 163. History of Mathematics (4)
Topics will vary from year to year in areas of mathematics and their development. Topics may include the evolution of mathematics from the Babylonian period to the eighteenth century using original sources, a history of the foundations of mathematics and the development of modern mathematics. Prerequisites: MATH 20B or consent of instructor.

MATH 168A. Topics in Applied Mathematics—Computer Science (4)
Topics to be chosen in areas of applied mathematics and mathematical aspects of computer science. May be taken for credit two times with different topics. Prerequisites: MATH 18 or MATH 20F or MATH 31AH, and MATH 20C. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 170A. Introduction to Numerical Analysis: Linear Algebra (4)
This course covers analysis of numerical methods for linear algebraic systems and least squares problems. Topics include orthogonalization methods. Ill conditioned problems. Eigenvalue and singular value computations. Knowledge of programming recommended. Prerequisites: MATH 18 or MATH 31AH, and MATH 20C or MATH 31BH and CSE 20 or MATH 15A or MATH 31CH or MATH 109. Students who have not completed the listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 170B. Introduction to Numerical Analysis: Approximation and Nonlinear Equations (4)
Rounding and discretization errors. Calculation of roots of polynomials and nonlinear equations. Interpolation. Approximation of functions. Knowledge of programming recommended. Prerequisites: MATH 170A.

MATH 170C. Introduction to Numerical Analysis: Ordinary Differential Equations (4)
Numerical differentiation and integration. Ordinary differential equations and their numerical solution. Basic existence and stability theory. Difference equations. Boundary value problems. Prerequisites: MATH 20D or 21D and MATH 170B, or consent of instructor.

MATH 171A. Introduction to Numerical Optimization: Linear Programming (4)
Linear optimization and applications. Linear programming, the simplex method, duality. Selected topics from integer programming, network flows, transportation problems, inventory problems, and other applications. Three lectures, one recitation. Knowledge of programming recommended. (Credit not allowed for both MATH 171A and ECON 172A.) Prerequisites: MATH 18 or MATH 20F or MATH 31AH, and MATH 20C. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 171B. Introduction to Numerical Optimization: Nonlinear Programming (4)
Convergence of sequences in Rn, multivariate Taylor series. Bisection and related methods for nonlinear equations in one variable. Newton’s methods for nonlinear equations in one and many variables. Unconstrained optimization and Newton’s method. Equality-constrained optimization, Kuhn-Tucker theorem. Inequality-constrained optimization. Three lectures, one recitation. Knowledge of programming recommended. (Credit not allowed for both MATH 171B and ECON 172B.) Prerequisites: MATH 20C or MATH 31BH and MATH 171A or consent of instructor.

MATH 173A. Optimization Methods for Data Science I (4)
Introduction to convexity: convex sets, convex functions; geometry of hyperplanes; support functions for convex sets; hyperplanes and support vector machines. Linear and quadratic programming: optimality conditions; duality; primal and dual forms of linear support vector machines; active-set methods; interior methods. Prerequisites: MATH 20C or MATH 31BH and MATH 18 or 20F or 31AH. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 173B. Optimization Methods for Data Science II (4)
Unconstrained optimization: linear least squares; randomized linear least squares; method(s) of steepest descent; line-search methods; conjugate-gradient method; comparing the efficiency of methods; randomized/stochastic methods; nonlinear least squares; norm minimization methods. Convex constrained optimization: optimality conditions; convex programming; Lagrangian relaxation; the method of multipliers; the alternating direction method of multipliers; minimizing combinations of norms. Prerequisites: MATH 173A. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 174. Numerical Methods for Physical Modeling (4)
(Conjoined with MATH 274.) Floating point arithmetic, direct and iterative solution of linear equations, iterative solution of nonlinear equations, optimization, approximation theory, interpolation, quadrature, numerical methods for initial and boundary value problems in ordinary differential equations. (Students may not receive credit for both MATH 174 and PHYS 105, AMES 153 or 154. Students may not receive credit for MATH 174 if MATH 170A, B, or C has already been taken.) Graduate students will do an extra assignment/exam. Prerequisites: Math 20D or MATH 21D, and either MATH 20F or MATH 31AH, or consent of instructor.

MATH 175. Numerical Methods for Partial Differential Equations (4)
(Conjoined with MATH 275.) Mathematical background for working with partial differential equations. Survey of finite difference, finite element, and other numerical methods for the solution of elliptic, parabolic, and hyperbolic partial differential equations. (Formerly MATH 172. Students may not receive credit for MATH 175/275 and MATH 172.) Graduate students do an extra paper, project, or presentation, per instructor. Prerequisites: MATH 174 or MATH 274, or consent of instructor.

MATH 179. Projects in Computational and Applied Mathematics (4)
(Conjoined with MATH 279.) Mathematical models of physical systems arising in science and engineering, good models and well-posedness, numerical and other approximation techniques, solution algorithms for linear and nonlinear approximation problems, scientific visualizations, scientific software design and engineering, project-oriented. Graduate students will do an extra paper, project, or presentation per instructor. Prerequisites: MATH 174 or MATH 274 or consent of instructor.

MATH 180A. Introduction to Probability (4)
Probability spaces, random variables, independence, conditional probability, distribution, expectation, variance, joint distributions, central limit theorem. (Two units of credit offered for MATH 180A if ECON 120A previously, no credit offered if ECON 120A concurrently. Two units of credit offered for MATH 180A if MATH 183 or 186 taken previously or concurrently.) Prior or concurrent enrollment in MATH 109 is highly recommended. Prerequisites: Math 20C or MATH 31BH, or consent of instructor.

MATH 180B. Introduction to Stochastic Processes I (4)
Random vectors, multivariate densities, covariance matrix, multivariate normal distribution. Random walk, Poisson process. Other topics if time permits. Prerequisites: MATH 20D and either MATH 18 or MATH 20F or MATH 31AH, and MATH 109 or MATH 31CH, and MATH 180A. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 180C. Introduction to Stochastic Processes II (4)
Markov chains in discrete and continuous time, random walk, recurrent events. If time permits, topics chosen from stationary normal processes, branching processes, queuing theory. Prerequisites: MATH 180B or consent of instructor.

MATH 181A. Introduction to Mathematical Statistics I (4)
Multivariate distribution, functions of random variables, distributions related to normal. Parameter estimation, method of moments, maximum likelihood. Estimator accuracy and confidence intervals. Hypothesis testing, type I and type II errors, power, one-sample t-test. Prior or concurrent enrollment in MATH 109 is highly recommended. Prerequisites: MATH 180A, and MATH 18 or MATH 20F or MATH 31AH, and MATH 20C. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 181B. Introduction to Mathematical Statistics II (4)
Hypothesis testing. Linear models, regression, and analysis of variance. Goodness of fit tests. Nonparametric statistics. Two units of credit offered for MATH 181B if ECON 120B previously; no credit offered if ECON 120B concurrently. Prior enrollment in MATH 109 is highly recommended. Prerequisites: MATH 181A or consent of instructor.

MATH 181C. Mathematical Statistics—Nonparametric Statistics (4)
Topics covered may include the following: classical rank test, rank correlations, permutation tests, distribution free testing, efficiency, confidence intervals, nonparametric regression and density estimation, resampling techniques (bootstrap, jackknife, etc.) and cross validations. Prior enrollment in MATH 109 is highly recommended. Prerequisites: MATH 181B or consent of instructor.

MATH 181D. Statistical Learning (4)
Statistical learning refers to a set of tools for modeling and understanding complex data sets. It uses developments in optimization, computer science, and in particular machine learning. This encompasses many methods such as dimensionality reduction, sparse representations, variable selection, classification, boosting, bagging, support vector machines, and machine learning. Prerequisites: ECE 109 or ECON 120A or MAE 108 or MATH 181A or MATH 183 or MATH 186 or MATH 189. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 181E. Mathematical Statistics—Time Series (4)
Analysis of trends and seasonal effects, autoregressive and moving averages models, forecasting, informal introduction to spectral analysis. Prerequisites: MATH 181B or consent of instructor.

MATH 181F. Sampling Surveys and Experimental Design (4)
Design of sampling surveys: simple, stratified, systematic, cluster, network surveys. Sources of bias in surveys. Estimators and confidence intervals based on unequal probability sampling. Design and analysis of experiments: block, factorial, crossover, matched-pairs designs. Analysis of variance, re-randomization, and multiple comparisons. Prerequisites: ECE 109 or ECON 120A or MAE 108 or MATH 11 or MATH 181A or MATH 183 or MATH 186 or MATH 189. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 182. Hidden Data in Random Matrices (4)
Rigorous treatment of principal component analysis, one of the most effective methods in finding signals amidst the noise of large data arrays. Topics include singular value decomposition for matrices, maximal likelihood estimation, least squares methods, unbiased estimators, random matrices, Wigner’s semicircle law, Markchenko-Pastur laws, universality of eigenvalue statistics, outliers, the BBP transition, applications to community detection, and stochastic block model. Students will not receive credit for both MATH 182 and DSC 155. Completion of MATH 102 is encouraged but not required. Prerequisites: MATH 180A, and MATH 18 or MATH 31AH. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 183. Statistical Methods (4)
Introduction to probability. Discrete and continuous random variables–binomial, Poisson and Gaussian distributions. Central limit theorem. Data analysis and inferential statistics: graphical techniques, confidence intervals, hypothesis tests, curve fitting. (Credit not offered for MATH 183 if ECON 120A, ECE 109, MAE 108, MATH 181A, or MATH 186 previously or concurrently taken. Two units of credit offered for MATH 183 if MATH 180A taken previously or concurrently.) Prerequisites: MATH 20C or MATH 31BH, or consent of instructor.

MATH 184. Enumerative Combinatorics (4)
Introduction to the theory and applications of combinatorics. Enumeration of combinatorial structures (permutations, integer partitions, set partitions). Bijections, inclusion-exclusion, ordinary and exponential generating functions. Renumbered from MATH 184A; credit not offered for MATH 184 if MATH 184A if previously taken. Credit not offered for MATH 184 if MATH 188 previously taken. If MATH 184 and MATH 188 are concurrently taken, credit only offered for MATH 188. Prerequisites: MATH 31CH or MATH 109. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 185. Introduction to Computational Statistics (4)
Statistical analysis of data by means of package programs. Regression, analysis of variance, discriminant analysis, principal components, Monte Carlo simulation, and graphical methods. Emphasis will be on understanding the connections between statistical theory, numerical results, and analysis of real data. Recommended preparation: exposure to computer programming (such as CSE 5A, CSE 7, or ECE 15) highly recommended. Prerequisites: MATH 181A, or ECON 120B, and either MATH 18 or MATH 20F or MATH 31AH, and MATH 20C or MATH 31BH. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 186. Probability and Statistics for Bioinformatics (4)
This course will cover discrete and random variables, data analysis and inferential statistics, likelihood estimators and scoring matrices with applications to biological problems. Introduction to Binomial, Poisson, and Gaussian distributions, central limit theorem, applications to sequence and functional analysis of genomes and genetic epidemiology. (Credit not offered for MATH 186 if ECON 120A, ECE 109, MAE 108, MATH 181A, or MATH 183 previously or concurrently. Two units of credit offered for MATH 186 if MATH 180A taken previously or concurrently.) Prerequisites: MATH 20C or MATH 31BH, or consent of instructor.

MATH 187A. Introduction to Cryptography (4)
An introduction to the basic concepts and techniques of modern cryptography. Classical cryptanalysis. Probabilistic models of plaintext. Monalphabetic and polyalphabetic substitution. The one-time system. Caesar-Vigenere-Playfair-Hill substitutions. The Enigma. Modern-day developments. The Data Encryption Standard. Public key systems. Security aspects of computer networks. Data protection. Electronic mail. Recommended preparation: basic programming experience. Renumbered from MATH 187. Students may not receive credit for both MATH 187A and MATH 187. Prerequisites: MATH 10A or MATH 20A. Students who have not completed listed prerequisite may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 187B. Mathematics of Modern Cryptography (4)
The object of this course is to study modern public key cryptographic systems and cryptanalysis (e.g., RSA, Diffie-Hellman, elliptic curve cryptography, lattice-based cryptography, homomorphic encryption) and the mathematics behind them. We also explore other applications of these computational techniques (e.g., integer factorization and attacks on RSA). Recommended preparation: Familiarity with Python and/or mathematical software (especially SAGE) would be helpful, but it is not required. Prerequisites: MATH 187 or MATH 187A and MATH 18 or MATH 31AH or MATH 20F. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 188. Algebraic Combinatorics (4)
A rigorous introduction to algebraic combinatorics. Basic enumeration and generating functions. Enumeration involving group actions: Polya theory. Posets and Sperner property. q-analogs and unimodality. Partitions and tableaux. Credit not offered for MATH 188 if MATH 184 or MATH 184A previously taken. If MATH 184 and MATH 188 are concurrently taken, credit only offered for MATH 188. Prerequisites: MATH 31CH or MATH 109 and MATH 18 or MATH 31AH and MATH 100A or 103A. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 189. Exploratory Data Analysis and Inference (4)
An introduction to various quantitative methods and statistical techniques for analyzing data—in particular big data. Quick review of probability continuing to topics of how to process, analyze, and visualize data using statistical language R. Further topics include basic inference, sampling, hypothesis testing, bootstrap methods, and regression and diagnostics. Offers conceptual explanation of techniques, along with opportunities to examine, implement, and practice them in real and simulated data. Prerequisites: MATH 18 or MATH 20F or MATH 31AH, and MATH 20C and one of BENG 134, CSE 103, ECE 109, ECON 120A, MAE 108, MATH 180A, MATH 183, MATH 186, or SE 125. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 190A. Foundations of Topology I (4)
An introduction to point set topology: topological spaces, subspace topologies, product topologies, quotient topologies, continuous maps and homeomorphisms, metric spaces, connectedness, compactness, basic separation, and countability axioms. Examples. Instructor may choose further topics such as Urysohn’s lemma, Urysohn’s metrization theorem. Formerly MATH 190. Students may not receive credit for MATH 190A and MATH 190. Prerequisites: MATH 31CH or MATH 140A or MATH 142A. Students who have not completed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 190B. Foundations of Topology II (4)
An introduction to the fundamental group: homotopy and path homotopy, homotopy equivalence, basic calculations of fundamental groups, fundamental group of the circle and applications (for instance to retractions and fixed-point theorems), van Kampen’s theorem, covering spaces, universal covers. Examples of all of the above. Instructor may choose further topics such as deck transformations and the Galois correspondence, basic homology, compact surfaces. Prerequisites: MATH 190A. Students who have not completed the listed prerequisite may enroll with consent of instructor.

MATH 191. Topics in Topology (4)
Topics to be chosen by the instructor from the fields of differential algebraic, geometric, and general topology. Prerequisites: MATH 190A or consent of instructor.

MATH 193A. Actuarial Mathematics I (4)
Probabilistic Foundations of Insurance. Short-term risk models. Survival distributions and life tables. Introduction to life insurance. Prerequisites: MATH 180A or MATH 183, or consent of instructor.

MATH 193B. Actuarial Mathematics II (4)
Life Insurance and Annuities. Analysis of premiums and premium reserves. Introduction to multiple life functions and decrement models as time permits. Prerequisites: MATH 193A or consent of instructor.

MATH 194. The Mathematics of Finance (4)
Introduction to the mathematics of financial models. Basic probabilistic models and associated mathematical machinery will be discussed, with emphasis on discrete time models. Concepts covered will include conditional expectation, martingales, optimal stopping, arbitrage pricing, hedging, European and American options. Prerequisites: MATH 20D, and either MATH 18 or MATH 20F or MATH 31AH, and MATH 180A. Students who have not completed listed prerequisites may enroll with consent of instructor. Students completing ECON 120A instead of MATH 180A must obtain consent of instructor to enroll.

MATH 195. Introduction to Teaching in Mathematics (4)
Students will be responsible for and teach a class section of a lower-division mathematics course. They will also attend a weekly meeting on teaching methods. (Does not count toward a minor or major.) Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

MATH 196. Student Colloquium (1)
A variety of topics and current research results in mathematics will be presented by guest lecturers and students under faculty direction. May be taken for P/NP grade only. Prerequisites: upper-division status.

MATH 197. Extracurricular Industry Practicum (2 or 4)
An enrichment program which provides academic credit for work experience with public/private sector employers. After independently securing an internship with significant mathematical content, students will identify a faculty member to work with directly, discussing the mathematics involved. Faculty may require related readings and assignments as appropriate. May be taken for credit three times. Units may not be applied towards major graduation requirements. Prerequisites: permission of department.

MATH 199. Independent Study for Undergraduates (2 or 4)
Independent reading in advanced mathematics by individual students. Three periods. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: permission of department.

MATH 199H. Honors Thesis Research in Mathematics for Undergraduates (2–4)
Honors thesis research for seniors participating in the Honors Program. Research is conducted under the supervision of a mathematics faculty member. Prerequisites: admission to the Honors Program in mathematics, department stamp.

MUIR 1. First Year Experience (2)
This course facilitates academic success at a leading research university by helping students understand and embrace academic and curricular expectations, engage and map cocurricular opportunities, and strengthen critical thinking and organizational, interpersonal, and wellness skills. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: department approval. Open to incoming Muir College students only.

MUIR 2. Transfer Year Experience (2)
This course facilitates academic success at a leading research university by helping students understand and embrace academic and curricular expectations, engage and map cocurricular opportunities, and strengthen critical thinking and organizational, interpersonal, and wellness skills. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: department approval. Open to Muir College transfer students only.

MUIR 199. Muir Special Project (4–16)
A course of independent work on a research or creative project to satisfy a Muir graduation requirement. (Only Muir students who have had Muir Special Project proposals approved may enroll in this course.) Students wishing to enroll must submit a written request with a description of the project. (Muir students must submit the Muir Special Project 199 form to the major advisor and to the Office of the Provost by the seventh week of the quarter prior to the quarter in which the 199 is to be undertaken. For information on other requirements, consult the provost’s office.) Prerequisites: upper-division status, approval by project advisor and by provost. (Letter grades only.)

MCWP 40. Critical Writing (4)
First course of sequence in university reading and writing which satisfies the Muir College graduation requirement in writing. Required of all Muir College first-year students and of transfer students who have not completed a comparable course elsewhere. MCWP 40 introduces students to the basic elements of argument and analysis. Students engage in close reading of texts, weekly writing and revision, and individual conferences. Course must be taken for a letter grade. Those who need additional work to prepare for MCWP 50 will be given a grade of IP and will be required to take MCWP 41. Prerequisites: satisfaction of the UC Entry Level Writing requirement.

MCWP 50. Critical Writing (4)
Second course of sequence in reading and writing which satisfies the Muir College graduation requirement in writing. Required of all Muir College first-year students and of transfer students. MCWP 50 focuses on advanced skills of argument and analysis. Students engage in close reading of texts, weekly writing and revision, and individual conferences. Course must be taken for a letter grade. Prerequisites: satisfaction of MCWP 40 requirement or completion of TAG or IGETC agreement.

MCWP 125. Argument and Analysis (4)
An advanced course in argumentation and analysis, with particular attention both to constructing arguments and analyzing the logic and rhetoric of others’ arguments. Students will engage in close reading of texts, weekly writing and revision, and individual conferences. A course specially designed for and required of transfer students who enter Muir College under the aegis of TAG or IGETC. Prerequisites: department approval.

MUS 1A. Fundamentals of Music A (4)
This course, first in a three-quarter sequence, is primarily intended for students without previous musical experience. It introduces music notation and basic music theory topics such as intervals, scales, keys, and chords, as well as basic rhythm skills. Prerequisites: none.

MUS 1B. Fundamentals of Music B (4)
This course, second in a three-quarter sequence, focuses on understanding music theory and in developing musical ability through rhythm, ear training, and sight singing exercises. Topics include major and minor scales, seventh-chords, transposition, compound meter and rudiments of musical form. Prerequisites: MUS 1A.

MUS 1C. Fundamentals of Music C (4)
This course, third in a three-quarter sequence, offers solid foundation in musical literacy through exercises such as harmonic and melodic dictation, sight singing exercises and rhythm in various meters. Topics include complex rhythm, harmony, and basic keyboard skills. Prerequisites: MUS 1B.

MUS 2A-B-C. Basic Musicianship (4-4-4)
Primarily intended for music majors. Development of basic skills: perception and notation of pitch and temporal relationships. Introduction to functional harmony. Studies in melodic writing. Drills in sight singing, rhythmic reading, and dictation. Prerequisites: passing score on proficiency exam. Must be taken in sequence. Music majors must be concurrently enrolled in MUS 2AK, 2BK, and 2CK (Basic Keyboard).

MUS 2AK-BK-CK. Basic Keyboard (2-2-2)
Scales, chords, harmonic progressions, transposition, and simple pieces. Prerequisites: concurrent enrollment in MUS 2A, B, C.

MUS 2JK. Jazz Keyboard (2)
This course will acquaint students with basic concepts in jazz piano. Students will learn chord voicing, how to read a lead sheet, and modes for improvising. Major pianists from the idiom will be listened to and discussed. The course is ideal for non-pianists as well as pianists because its emphasis is theoretical, not technical. Prerequisites: MUS 2AK and 2BK or passing proficiency exam, or consent of instructor. Concurrent enrollment in MUS 2C. Majors only.

MUS 4. Introduction to Western Music (4)
A brief survey of the history of Western music from the Middle Ages to the present. Much attention will be paid to the direct experience of listening to music and attendance of concerts. Class consists of lectures, listening labs, and live performances. Prerequisites: none.

MUS 5. Sound in Time (4)
An examination and exploration of the art and science of music making. Topics include acoustics, improvisation, composition, and electronic and popular forms. There will be required listening, reading, and creative assignments. No previous musical background required. Prerequisites: none.

MUS 6. Electronic Music (4)
Lectures and listening sessions devoted to the most significant works of music realized through the use of computers and other electronic devices from the middle of this century through the present. Prerequisites: none.

MUS 7. Music, Science, and Computers (4)
Exploration of the interactions among music, science, and technology, including the history and current development of science and technology from the perspective of music. Prerequisites: none.

MUS 8. American Music: Jazz Cultures (4)
Jazz is one of the primary foundations for American music in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. This course highlights the multicultural and international scope of jazz by taking a thematic rather than a chronological approach to the subject, and by highlighting the music and lives of a diverse array of jazz practitioners from around the country and around the world. Students may not receive credit for both MUS 8 and MUS 8GS. Prerequisites: none. (Offered in selected years.)

MUS 9. Symphony (4)
This course will consist of lectures and listening sessions devoted to a detailed discussion of a selection of representative orchestral works (e.g., Mozart, Beethoven, Berlioz, Stravinsky, Ligeti, etc.). Prerequisites: none. (Offered in selected years.)

MUS 11. Folk Music (4)
A course on folk music of the world, covered through lectures, films, and listening sessions devoted to detailed discussion of music indigenous to varying countries/areas of the world. Topics vary from year to year. May be repeated once for credit. Prerequisites: none.

MUS 12. Opera (4)
A study of works from the history of opera to coincide when possible with operas presented in the San Diego opera season. Class consists of lectures, listening labs, live performances, and opera on video. Prerequisites: none.

MUS 13. Worlds of Music (4)
Through surveying selected musical traditions and practices from around the world, this course explores the ways in which music both reflects and affects social, cultural, and ecological relationships. Specific case studies will be covered through lectures, films, and listening sessions. Prerequisites: none.

MUS 14. Contemporary Music (4)
This course offers opportunities to prepare oneself for experiences with new music (through preview lectures), hear performances (by visiting or faculty artists), to discuss each event informally with a faculty panel: an effort to foster informed listening to the new in music. Prerequisites: none.

MUS 15. Popular Music (4)
A course on popular music from different time periods, covered through lectures, films, and listening sessions. Topics vary from year to year. May be repeated once for credit. Prerequisites: none.

MUS 16. The Beatles (4)
This course will explore The Beatles from musical, cultural, historical, technological, and critical angles. It will place them in context, examining their assorted confluences and wide influences. The group will be critically examined as artists, innovators, and public personalities. Listening, watching, and discussion will provide a broader, deeper, and more personal understanding of the group’s enduring appeal. Prerequisites: none.

MUS 17. Hip-Hop (4)
This class presents a broad chronological overview of the development of hip-hop as a musical form from the late 1970s through today. It examines the development of the style in relation to direct context and to earlier African American musical and cultural forms and considers the technological and legal issues that have impacted its development. The class is listening intensive and students will be expected to know and recognize essential structures and production techniques. Prerequisites: none.

MUS 18. Klezmer Music (4)
A survey of Eastern European Jewish folk music, Yiddish theatre and popular song, and their transition to America. Credit not allowed for MUS 18 and JUDA 18. (Cross-listed with JUDA 18.) Prerequisites: none.

MUS 19. Blacktronika: Afrofuturism in Electronic Music (4)
Explores the lineage of electronic music’s Black pioneers, who have been integral but overlooked in the discussion around the creation and development of house, techno, drum and bass, and experimental music. These musics were developed with sociopolitical movements at the foundation of the sounds. We will investigate the African diaspora lens through the artists’ usage of science fiction, technology, and futurist ideologies. Prerequisites: none.

MUS 20. Exploring the Musical Mind (4)
How do we transform complex sounds into comprehensible and meaningful music? What physiological, neurological, cognitive, and cultural systems are involved? Why do we make music in such diverse ways around the globe? Does music have evolutionary or ecological significance? What is the relationship between music, motion, and emotions? This course explores contemporary understandings of how we hear and how we become musical and invites students to listen to new music in new ways. Students may not receive credit for both MUS 20 and COGS 20. (Cross-listed with COGS 20.) Prerequisites: none.

MUS 32. Instrumental/Vocal Instruction (2)
Individual instruction on intermediate level in instrumental technique and repertory. For declared music majors and minors. Students must be simultaneously enrolled in a performance ensemble or nonperformance music course. May be taken six times for credit. Prerequisites: audition and department stamp.

MUS 32G. Group Instrumental Instruction (2)
Group instruction in instrumental or vocal technique and repertory. Intermediate level. Intended for students who make an important contribution to Department of Music ensembles. Prerequisites: written recommendation of ensemble director and audition for performance faculty on first day of classes required. Department stamp required. May be taken for credit six times. (Offered in selected years.)

MUS 32V. Vocal Instruction (1)
Individual instruction on intermediate level in vocal technique and repertory. For declared music majors and minors. Students must be simultaneously enrolled in a performance ensemble or nonperformance music course and in MUS 32VM. May be taken six times for credit. Prerequisites: audition and department stamp.

MUS 32VM. Vocal Master Class (1)
All students enrolled in voice lessons (32V, 132V, or 132C) perform for one another and their instructors. Students critique in-class performances, with emphasis on presentation, diction, dramatic effect, vocal quality, and musicality. Prerequisites: concurrent enrollment in MUS 32V, 132V, or 132C.

MUS 33A. Introduction to Composition I (4)
First course in a sequence for music majors and nonmajors pursuing an emphasis in composition. The course examines “sound” itself and various ways of building sounds into musical structures and develops skills in music notation. Students compose solo pieces in shorter forms. Students may not receive credit for both MUS 33 and 33A. Prerequisites: MUS 2C or consent of instructor.

MUS 33B. Introduction to Composition II (4)
Second part of course sequence for students pursuing a composition emphasis. Course continues the building of skills with the organization of basic compositional elements: pitch, rhythm, and timbre. It explores issues of musical texture, expression, and structure in traditional and contemporary repertoire. Writing for two instruments in more extended forms. Prerequisites: MUS 33A.

MUS 33C. Introduction to Composition III (4)
Third part of course sequence for students pursuing a composition emphasis. Course continues the development of skills in instrumentation and analysis. It includes a survey of advanced techniques in contemporary composition, with additional focus on notation, part-preparation, and the art of writing for small groups of instruments. Prerequisites: MUS 33B.

MUS 43. Department Seminar (1)
The department seminar serves both as a general department meeting and as a forum for the presentation of research and performances by visitors, faculty, and students. Required of all undergraduate music and music humanities majors every quarter a student is a declared music major. Four units or four quarters of enrollment are required of all undergraduate ICAM music majors who choose the MUS 43. Department Seminar option for their Visitor Series requirement. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit up to twelve times.

MUS 80. Special Topics in Music (1–4)
This course presents selected topics in music and consists of lecture and listening sessions. No prior technical knowledge is necessary. The course will be offered during summer session.

MUS 87. First-year Student Seminar (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students.

MUS 95. Ensemble Performance (2)
Performance in an ensemble appropriate to student abilities and interests. Normally each section requires student participation for the whole academic year, with credit for participation each quarter. Sections of MUS 95W have included: African drumming, Korean percussion, Indian sitar and tabla, koto, and Indonesian flute. Not all sections will be offered every year. May be repeated for credit. Grading on participation level, individual testing, comparative papers on repertoire covered, etc. Prerequisites: audition and consent of instructor for each section. Materials fee required.

MUS 101A. Music Theory and Practice I (4)
Study of modal counterpart in the style of the sixteenth century. Two-voice species counterpoint studies. Analysis of music of the period. Musicianship studies: sight-singing, dictation, and keyboard skills. Prerequisites: MUS 2C and 2CK.

MUS 101B. Music Theory and Practice II (4)
Study of tonal harmony and counterpoint. Analysis of Bach chorales and other music from the Baroque period. Musicianship studies: sight-singing, dictation, and keyboard skills. Prerequisites: MUS 2C.

MUS 101C. Music Theory and Practice III (4)
Tonal harmony and counterpoint. Analysis of larger classical forms: Sonata, Variation, Minuet and Trio, Rondo. Musicianship studies: sight-singing, dictation, and keyboard skills. Prerequisites: MUS 101B.

MUS 102. Topics in Music Theory (4)
Selected topics in music theory. Covers Western classical repertoire from 1850 to the present. Includes chromatic and post-tonal harmony, formal analysis. May be taken for credit up to two times. Prerequisites: MUS 101B.

MUS 103A. Seminar in Composition I (4)
First part in composition course sequence. Individual projects will be reviewed in seminar. Techniques of instrumentation will be developed through examination of scores and creative application. Assignments will include short exercises and analysis, and final project for standard ensemble. Prerequisites: MUS 33C.

MUS 103B. Seminar in Composition II (4)
Second part in composition course sequence. Intensive work in free composition by drafting a composition for presentation at the end of MUS 103C. Written analysis of contemporary repertoire is introduced. Instruction about calligraphic conventions including computer engraving programs. Prerequisites: MUS 103A.

MUS 103C. Seminar in Composition III (4)
Third part in composition course sequence. A mixture of individual lessons as well as group meetings, with discussion of topics germane to the development of composers, including musical aesthetics and contemporary orchestration techniques. Final performance of students’ work will take place at the end of the quarter. Prerequisites: MUS 103B.

MUS 103D-E-F. Honors Seminar in Composition (4-4-4)
Advanced individual projects for senior music majors pursuing honors in composition. Projects will be critically reviewed in seminar with fellow students and faculty composers. Prerequisites: MUS 103A-B-C and admission into the Department of Music Honors Program in composition. Department stamp required.

MUS 105. Jazz Composition (4)
This course will explore a range of compositional possibilities from song forms to modal and more extended forms. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: MUS 101A and 101B or consent of instructor.

MUS 106. Topics in Musical Analysis (4)
Topics in musical analysis. Covers full range of musical repertoire 1900 to present, including music that does not depend on notation. May be taken for credit up to two times. Prerequisites: MUS 2C.

MUS 107. Critical Studies Seminar (4)
This seminar explores the history of music in relation to critical issues, such as race, gender, sexuality, the environment, and politics. Readings include recent literature in cultural studies, musicology, and sociology. Topics vary. May be taken for credit up to two times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. Department stamp required.

MUS 110. Introduction to Ethnomusicology Seminar (4)
This seminar introduces the central theories, methods, and approaches used to study the music of contemporary cultures, in their local contexts. In addition to surveying key writings, students will document music from their local environment. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

MUS 111. Topics/World Music Traditions (4)
A study of particular regional music in their repertory, cultural context, and interaction with other traditions. Topics vary. May be taken for credit up to three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

MUS 112. Topics in European Music Before 1750 (4)
This course will address topics in medieval, Renaissance, and Baroque music; topics will vary from year to year. May be repeated five times for credit. Prerequisites: knowledge of music notation or consent of instructor; MUS 4, 8–10, or 120 recommended.

MUS 113. Topics in Classic, Romantic, and Modern Music (4)
This course will focus on topics in Western music from 1750 to the early twentieth century. May be taken for credit up to five times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. Department stamp required. MUS 4, 8–10, or 120 recommended.

MUS 114. Music and Ideas Since 1900 (4)
A critical examination of music from the early twentieth century to the present, focusing on the generation and embodiment of cultural ideas through and in music. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

MUS 115. Women in Music (4)
A survey of the biographical, historical, sociological, and political issues affecting woman musicians, their creativity, their opportunities, and their perception by others. It compares and contrasts the work of women composers, performers, patrons, teachers, and writers on music from the Middle Ages through the present. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

MUS 116. Popular Music Studies Seminar (4)
This course examines special topics in popular music from various sociopolitical, aesthetic, and performance perspectives. Readings include recent literature in cultural studies, musicology, and/or performance practice. Topics vary. May be taken three times for credit. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

MUS 120A. History of Music in Western Culture I (4)
This sequence introduces key concepts, histories, and practices in contemporary music studies. Students will explore methodological approaches and learn about current research through focused historical and ethnographic case studies. Prerequisites: MUS 1C or 2C or passing grade on proficiency exam. Music majors are recommended to take MUS 101A concurrently. Department stamp required for nonmajors.

MUS 120B. History of Music in Western Culture II (4)
This sequence introduces key concepts, histories, and practices in contemporary music studies. In this course, students will develop original applications for research skills discussed in MUS 120A. Prerequisites: MUS 120A. Music majors are recommended to take MUS 101B concurrently. Department stamp required for nonmajors.

MUS 120C. History of Music in Western Culture III (4)
This sequence introduces key concepts, histories, and practices in contemporary music studies. In this course, students carry out projects developed in MUS 120A-B with peer feedback and faculty advising. Prerequisites: MUS 120B. Music majors are recommended to take MUS 101C concurrently. Department stamp required for nonmajors.

MUS 126. Blues: An Oral Tradition (4)
This course will examine the development of the Blues from its roots in work-songs and the minstrel show to its flowering in the Mississippi Delta to the development of Urban Blues and the close relationship of the Blues with Jazz, Rhythm and Blues, and Rock and Roll. (Cross-listed with ETHN 178.) Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

MUS 127. Discover Jazz (4)
Offers an introduction to jazz, including important performers and their associated styles and techniques. Explores the often-provocative role jazz has played in American and global society, the diverse perceptions and arguments that have surrounded its production and reception, and how these have been inflected by issues of race, class, gender, and sexuality. Specific topics vary from year to year. (Cross-listed with ETHN 179.) Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

MUS 128. Principles and Practice of Conducting (4)
The theory and practice of instrumental and/or choral conducting as they have to do with basic baton techniques, score reading, interpretation, orchestration, program building, and functional analysis. Members of the class will be expected to demonstrate their knowledge in the conducting of a small ensemble performing literature from the eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth centuries. Prerequisites: MUS 2A-B-C and 101A-B-C. Department stamp required.

MUS 130. Chamber Music Performance (2–4/0)
Instruction in the preparation of small group performances of representative instrumental and vocal chamber music literature. May be taken for credit six times, after which students must enroll for zero units. Prerequisites: consent of instructor through audition.

MUS 131. Advanced Improvisation Performance (4/0)
Master class instruction in advanced improvisation performance for declared majors and minors only or consent of instructor. Audition required at first class meeting. May be repeated six times for credit. Prerequisites: consent of instructor through audition. Department stamp required.

MUS 132. Proseminar in Music Performance (4)
Individual or master class instruction in advanced instrumental performance. For declared music majors and minors. Students must be simultaneously enrolled in a performance ensemble or nonperformance music course. May be taken six times for credit. Prerequisites: audition and department stamp.

MUS 132C. Vocal Coaching (4)
Individual instruction in advanced vocal coaching. Emphasis placed on diction and musical issues. For declared music majors and minors. Students must be simultaneously enrolled in the Vocal Master Class, MUS 32VM. May be taken six times for credit. Prerequisites: at least one quarter of MUS 132V and consent of instructor. Department stamp required.

MUS 132R. Recital Preparation (4)
Advanced instrumental/vocal preparation for senior music majors pursuing honors in performance. Repertoire for a solo recital will be developed under the direction of the appropriate instrumental/vocal faculty member. Special audition required during Welcome Week preceding fall quarter. Prerequisites: by audition only; MUS 132. Department stamp required.

MUS 132V. Proseminar in Vocal Instruction (4)
Individual instruction in advanced vocal performance. For declared music majors and minors. Students must be simultaneously enrolled in a performance ensemble or nonperformance music course and in the Vocal Master Class, MUS 32VM. May be taken six times for credit. Prerequisites: audition and department stamp.

MUS 133. Projects in New Music Performance (4)
Ensemble performances of music from the recent past. Required a minimum of one time for all music majors. May be taken for credit up to two times. Prerequisites: consent of instructor through audition.

MUS 134. Symphonic Orchestra (4)
Repertoire is drawn from the classic symphonic literature of the eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth centuries with a strong emphasis on recently composed and new music. Distinguished soloists, as well as The La Jolla Symphony Chorus, frequently appear with the orchestra. The La Jolla Symphony Orchestra performs two full-length programs each quarter, each program being performed twice. May be repeated six times for credit. Prerequisites: audition and department stamp required.

MUS 137A. Jazz Theory and Improvisation (4)
Study of jazz theory and improvisation, focused on fundamental rhythmic, harmonic, melodic, and formal aspects of modern jazz style. Application of theoretical knowledge to instruments and concepts will be reinforced through listening, transcription work, and composition and improvisation exercises. First course of a yearlong sequence. Prerequisites: MUS 2A-B-C, proficiency exam, or consent of instructor.

MUS 137B. Jazz Theory and Improvisation (4)
Study of jazz theory and improvisation, focused on fundamental rhythmic, harmonic, melodic, and formal aspects of modern jazz style. Application of theoretical knowledge to instruments and concepts will be reinforced through listening, transcription work, and composition and improvisation exercises. Second course of a yearlong sequence; continuation of MUS 137A. Prerequisites: MUS 137A or consent of instructor.

MUS 137C. Jazz Theory and Improvisation (4)
Study of jazz theory and improvisation, focused on fundamental rhythmic, harmonic, melodic, and formal aspects of modern jazz style. Application of theoretical knowledge to instruments and concepts will be reinforced through listening, transcription work, and composition and improvisation exercises. Third course of a yearlong sequence; continuation of MUS 137B. Prerequisites: MUS 137B or consent of instructor.

MUS 137D. Seminar in Jazz Studies I (4)
Advanced individual projects for senior music majors pursuing honors in jazz and music of the African diaspora. Projects will be critically reviewed in seminar with fellow students and jazz faculty. First course of a yearlong sequence. Prerequisites: MUS 137A-B-C and admission into the Music Department Honors Program in jazz. Department stamp required.

MUS 137E. Seminar in Jazz Studies II (4)
Advanced individual projects for senior music majors pursuing honors in jazz and music of the African diaspora. Projects will be critically reviewed in seminar with fellow students and jazz faculty. Second course of a yearlong sequence; continuation of 137D. Prerequisites: MUS 137D and department stamp.

MUS 137F. Seminar in Jazz Studies III (4)
Advanced individual projects for senior music majors pursuing honors in jazz and music of the African diaspora. Projects will be critically reviewed in seminar with fellow students and jazz faculty. Third course of a yearlong sequence; continuation of 137E. Prerequisites: MUS 137E and department stamp.

MUS 143. Department Seminar (1)
The department seminar serves both as a general department meeting and as a forum for the presentation of research and performances by visitors, faculty, and students. Required of all undergraduate music majors every quarter.

MUS 150. Jazz and the Music of the African Diaspora: Special Topics Seminar (4)
An in-depth writing and listening intensive investigation into a jazz or diaspora-related music history topic. Topics vary from year to year. May be repeated once for credit. Prerequisites: MUS 126/ETHN 178, or MUS 127/ETHN 179, or consent of instructor.

MUS 151. Race, Culture, and Social Change (4)
Aggrieved groups generate distinctive cultural expressions by turning negative ascription into positive affirmation and by transforming segregation into congregation. This course examines the role of cultural expressions in struggles for social change by these communities inside and outside the United States. (Cross-listed with ETHN 108.) Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

MUS 152. Hip Hop: The Politics of Culture (4)
Examination of hip hop’s music, technology, lyrics, and its influence in graffiti, film, music video, fiction, advertising, gender, corporate investment, government, and censorship with a critical focus on race, gender, popular culture, and the politics of creative expression. (Cross-listed with ETHN 128.) Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

MUS 153. African Americans and the Mass Media (4)
Examination of media representations of African Americans from slavery to the present focusing on emergence and transmission of enduring stereotypes, their relationship to changing social, political, and economic frameworks, and African Americans’ responses to and interpretations of these mediated images. (Cross-listed with ETHN 164.) Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

MUS 160A. Senior Project in Computing Arts I (4)
Students pursue projects of their own design over two quarters with support from faculty in a seminar environment. Project proposals are developed, informed by project development guidelines from real world examples. Collaborations are possible. Two production-course limitation. Renumber from ICAM 160A. Students may receive credit for only one of the following: MUS 160A, VIS 160A, ICAM 160A. Prerequisites: VIS 141B or VIS 145B or VIS 147B or MUS 172. Open to music and ICAM majors only. Department stamp required.

MUS 160B. Senior Project in Computing Arts II (4)
Continuation of MUS 160A or VIS 160A. Completion and presentation of independent projects along with documentation. Two production-course limitation. Renumbered from ICAM 160B. Students may receive credit for only one of the following: MUS 160B, VIS 160B, ICAM 160B. Prerequisites: MUS 160A or VIS 160A. Open to music and ICAM majors only. Department stamp required.

MUS 170. Musical Acoustics (4)
(Formerly MUS 160A.) An introduction to the acoustics of music with particular emphasis on contemporary digital techniques for understanding and manipulating sound. Prerequisites: MUS 1A, 2A, or 4.

MUS 171. Computer Music I (4)
(Formerly MUS 160C.) A practical introduction to computer techniques for desktop audio editing, MIDI control, and real-time music algorithms using the MAX programming environment. Recommended preparation: completion of MUS 170. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; restricted to music majors, ICAM-music and ICAM-visual arts majors and minors, or consent of instructor.

MUS 172. Computer Music II (4)
(Formerly MUS 161.) Computer synthesis techniques including wavetable and additive synthesis, waveshaping, and sampling. Transformation of musical sounds using filters, modulation, and delay effects. Fourier analysis of sounds. Prerequisites: MUS 171 (formerly MUS 160C); music majors, ICAM-music and ICAM-visual arts majors and minors, or consent of instructor.

MUS 173. Electronic Music Production and Composition (4)
(Formerly MUS 162.) Creative music production using digital audio workstations (DAWs), emphasizing hands-on composition projects including tempo warping, beat and tonality matching, virtual drum kits, chord progressions, sound processing and effects, arrangement, and remixing in the context of both popular and experimental genres. Existing works are analyzed and dissected for aesthetic value and production technique. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; restricted to music, ICAM-music, and ICAM-visual arts majors and minors, or consent of instructor.

MUS 174A. Audio/MlDI Studio Techniques I (4)
First class in a yearlong sequence. Surveys hardware and software resources in an advanced analog/digital and media studio. Required course for use of the studio. Topics include: electronic and computer music, digital and analog audio signal mixing and manipulation, studio devices, interfacing, compositional applications, MIDI synchronization, performance and student projects. 174A focuses on signals, mics, device-based recording, mixing, monitoring. Prerequisites: MUS 170; restricted to music, ICAM-music, and ICAM-visual arts majors and minors, or consent of instructor.

MUS 174B. Audio/MlDI Studio Techniques II (4)
Second class in a yearlong sequence. Surveys hardware and software resources in an advanced analog/digital and media studio. Required course for use of the studio. Topics include: electronic and computer music, digital and analog audio signal mixing and manipulation, studio devices, interfacing, compositional applications, MIDI synchronization, performance and studio techniques, and student projects. 174B focuses on digital audio workstations, computer-based mixing and editing, sound file transformation. Prerequisites: MUS 170, MUS 174A; restricted to music, ICAM-music, and ICAM-visual arts majors and minors, or consent of instructor.

MUS 174C. Audio/MlDI Studio Techniques III (4)
Third class in a yearlong sequence. Surveys hardware and software resources in an advanced analog/digital and media studio. Required course for use of the studio. Topics include: electronic and computer music, digital and analog audio signal mixing and manipulation, studio devices, interfacing, compositional applications, MIDI synchronization, performance and studio techniques, and student projects. 174C focuses on MIDI, synchronization, and sound-for-picture. Prerequisites: MUS 170, MUS 174B; restricted to music, ICAM-music, and ICAM-visual arts majors and minors, or consent of instructor.

MUS 175. Musical Psychoacoustics (4)
Survey of psychoacoustical phenomena, theories of hearing, and their relation to musical perception and cognition. Techniques of psychoacoustical experimentation. Prerequisites: MUS 170 recommended.

MUS 176. Music Technology Seminar (4)
(Formerly MUS 163.) Selected topics in music technology and its application to composition and/or performance. Offerings vary according to faculty availability and interest. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisites: MUS 172 (formerly MUS 161) and consent of instructor.

MUS 177. Music Programming (4)
Fundamentals of programming music software in C and C++. DSP implementation of oscillators, filters, delay, reverb and spectral processing; programming techniques specific to audio and MIDI and simple GUI design for parameter control and signal display. Implementation using a plug-in or external programming interface such as for VST, Audio Unit, PD, or Max/MSP. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: MUS 172 (formerly MUS 161); restricted to music, ICAM-music, and ICAM-visual arts majors and minors, or consent of instructor.

MUS 192. Senior Seminar in Music (1)
The Senior Seminar Program is designed to allow senior undergraduates to meet with faculty members in a small group setting to explore an intellectual topic in music (at the upper-division level). Topics will vary from quarter to quarter. Senior Seminars may be taken for credit up to four times, with a change in topic, and permission of the department. Enrollment is limited to twenty students, with preference given to seniors. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; department stamp and/or consent of instructor required.

MUS 195. Instructional Assistance in Music (2)
Assisting in the instruction of an undergraduate music class under the direct and constant supervision of a faculty member. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and department approval.

MUS 198. Directed Group Study in Music (1–4)
Concentrated inquiry into various problems not covered in the usual undergraduate courses. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and department chair approval. Pass/Not Pass grade only.

MUS 199. Independent Study in Music (1–4)
Independent reading, research, or creative work under the direction of a faculty member, provided no course covering the material to be studied already exists, and the study area derives from previous course work. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and department chair approval. Department stamp required. Pass/Not Pass grade only. May be taken for credit two times.

NEU 199. Independent Research (2 or 4)
Laboratory research under the supervision of individual members of the faculty of the neurosciences department in one or a combination of neurosciences disciplines, e.g., neuroanatomy, neurophysiology, neurochemistry, neuropharmacology. (P/NP grades only.) (F,W,S)

PHIL 1. Introduction to Philosophy (4)
A general introduction to some of the fundamental questions, texts, and methods of philosophy. Multiple topics will be covered, and may include the existence of God, the nature of mind and body, free will, ethics and political philosophy, knowledge and skepticism.

PHIL 10. Introduction to Logic (4)
Basic concepts and techniques in both informal and formal logic and reasoning, including a discussion of argument, inference, proof, and common fallacies, and an introduction to the syntax, semantics, and proof method in sentential (propositional) logic. May be used to fulfill general-education requirements for Warren and Eleanor Roosevelt Colleges.

PHIL 12. Scientific Reasoning (4)
Strategies of scientific inquiry: how elementary logic, statistical inference, and experimental design are integrated to evaluate hypotheses in the natural and social sciences. May be used to fulfill general-education requirements for Marshall, Warren, and Eleanor Roosevelt Colleges.

PHIL 13. Introduction to Philosophy: Ethics (4)
An inquiry into the nature of morality and its role in personal or social life by way of classical and/or contemporary works in ethics. May be used to fulfill general-education requirements for Muir and Marshall Colleges.

PHIL 14. Introduction to Philosophy: The Nature of Reality (4)
A survey of central issues and figures in the Western metaphysical tradition. Topics include the mind-body problem, freedom and determinism, personal identity, appearance and reality, and the existence of God.

PHIL 15. Introduction to Philosophy: Knowledge and Its Limits (4)
A study of the grounds and scope of human knowledge, both commonsense and scientific, as portrayed in the competing traditions of Continental rationalism, British empiricism, and contemporary cognitive science.

PHIL 16. Science Fiction and Philosophy (4)
An introduction to philosophy which uses science fiction to make abstract philosophical problems vivid. Science fiction themes may include time travel, teleportation, virtual reality, super-intelligent robots, futuristic utopias, and parallel universes. These scenarios raise philosophical questions about knowledge, reality, ethics, and the mind.

PHIL 24. Science and Pseudoscience (4)
The differences among good science, bad science, and pseudoscience. Topics include the philosophical and practical demarcation problems; science and values; probabilistic fallacies, cognitive biases, and perceptual illusions; causation versus correlation, the placebo effect; why and when science is trustworthy; and case studies ranging from ESP to homeopathy to climate change denialism.

PHIL 25. Science, Philosophy, and the Big Questions (4)
An inquiry into fundamental questions at the intersection of science and philosophy. Topics can include Einstein’s universe; scientific revolutions; the mind and the brain.

PHIL 26. Science, Society, and Values (4)
An exploration of the interaction between scientific theory and practice on the one hand, and society and values on the other. Topics can include the relationship between science and religion, global climate change, DNA, medicine, and ethics.

PHIL 27. Ethics and Society (4)
An examination of ethical principles (e.g., utilitarianism, individual rights, etc.) and their social and political applications to contemporary issues: abortion, environmental protection, and affirmative action. Ethical principles will also be applied to moral dilemmas in government, law, business, and the professions. Warren College students must take course for a letter grade in order to satisfy the Warren College general-education requirement. Prerequisites: CAT 2 and 3 or DOC 2 and 3 or MCWP 40 and 50 or HUM 1 and 2 or MMW 2 and 3 or WCWP 10A and B.

PHIL 28. Ethics and Society II (4)
An examination of a single set of major contemporary social, political, or economic issues (e.g., environmental ethics, international ethics) in light of ethical and moral principles and values. Warren College students must take course for a letter grade in order to satisfy the Warren College general-education requirement. Prerequisites: PHIL 27 or POLI 27.

PHIL 31. Introduction to Ancient Philosophy (4)
A survey of classical Greek philosophy with an emphasis on Socrates, Plato and Aristotle, though some consideration may be given to Pre-Socratic and/or Hellenistic philosophers.

PHIL 32. Philosophy and the Rise of Modern Science (4)
Beginning with the contrast between medieval and early modern thought, the course focuses on the relation of seventeenth-century philosophy and the emergence of modern natural science. Figures to be studied may include Bacon, Galileo, Descartes, Cavendish, Hobbes, Leibniz, and Newton.

PHIL 33. Philosophy between Reason and Despair (4)
Introduction to nineteenth-century philosophy, focusing on skepticism about the authority of reason to answer questions about the ultimate meaning and value of human life. Figures discussed may include Kant, Schopenhauer, Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Goldman, and de Beauvoir.

PHIL 35. Philosophy in the Americas (4)
An exploration of central philosophical issues as they have been taken up in the diverse philosophical traditions of the Americas, such as indigenous philosophy, Latin American philosophy, American Pragmatism, and the Civil Rights movement, among others. Topics may include ethics, social and political philosophy, colonialism, philosophy of race and gender, environmentalism, and issues in philosophy of language.

PHIL 50. Law and Society (4)
A survey of philosophical issues concerning law and society, such as the rule of law, the moral limits of the law, individual rights, judicial review in a constitutional democracy, the justification of punishment, and responsibility.

PHIL 51. Climate Ethics (4)
This course will address the complex moral challenge of climate change. Topics include ethical values in climate modeling; the moral psychology of climate change; individual versus structural approaches to decarbonization; global justice and the distribution of greenhouse gas emissions; the ethics of geoengineering; decolonization and the climate crisis; discounting and obligations to future generations.

PHIL 55. Living in a Digital World (4)
As our physical and digital lives increasingly merge, we face new challenges in understanding how to think about both worlds. This course will examine many philosophical issues and challenges that arise as our world rapidly becomes more digital.

PHIL 60. Philosophy of Love and Sex (4)
This course will focus on philosophical topics surrounding love and sex by examining both historical and contemporary texts. We will discuss love and sex from a number of different angles and perspectives, and focus on issues such as the nature of love both as a mental and social phenomenon; different kinds of love and their demands on us; the connection between love and sex; the ethics and politics of love, sex, and marriage; and sex and consent.

PHIL 87. First-year Student Seminar (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students.

PHIL 90. Basic Problem in Philosophy (4)
An investigation of a selected philosophical topic through readings, discussions, and written assignments. May be taken for credit twice, when topics vary.

PHIL 100. Plato (4)
A study of Socrates and/or Plato through major dialogues of Plato. Possible topics include the virtues and happiness; weakness of the will; political authority and democracy; the theory of Forms and sensible flux; immortality; relativism, skepticism, and knowledge. May be repeated for credit with change of content and approval of instructor. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 101. Aristotle (4)
A study of major issues in Aristotle’s works, such as the categories; form and matter; substance, essence, and accident; the soul; virtue, happiness, and politics. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 102. Hellenistic Philosophy (4)
A study of selected texts from the main schools of Hellenistic philosophy—Stoicism, Epicureanism, and Skepticism. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 105. Topics in Early Modern Philosophy (4)
A study of one or more figures from seventeenth- and/or eighteenth-century philosophy, such as Bacon, Descartes, Hobbes, Cavendish, Conway, Spinoza, Locke, Malebranche, Leibniz, Astell, Berkeley, Du Chatelet, Hume, or Reid. The focus may be on particular texts or intellectual themes and traditions. May be taken for credit up to two times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 106. Kant (4)
A study of selected portions of The Critique of Pure Reason and other theoretical writings and/or his major works in moral theory. May be repeated for credit with change in content and approval of the instructor. Prerequisites: PHIL 32 or 33 or 104 or 105 or 111 or 112 or consent of instructor.

PHIL 107. Hegel (4)
A study of one or more of Hegel’s major works, in particular, The Phenomenology of Spirit and The Philosophy of Right. Readings and discussion may also include other figures in the Idealist tradition—such as Fichte, Hölderlin, and Schelling—and critics of the Idealist tradition—such as Marx and Kierkegaard. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 108. Nineteenth-Century Philosophy (4)
A study of one or more figures in nineteenth-century philosophy, such as Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, Kierkegaard, Marx, Emerson, Thoreau, Goldman, Luxemburg, James, and Mill. The focus may be on particular figures or intellectual themes and traditions. May be repeated for credit with change of content and approval of instructor. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 109. History of Analytic Philosophy (4)
Central texts, figures, and traditions in analytic philosophy. Figures may include Frege, Russell, Wittgenstein, Carnap, Moore, Austin, Quine, and Anscombe. May be repeated for credit with change of content and approval of the instructor. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 110. History of Philosophy: Ancient (4)
An examination of ancient Greek philosophy, focusing on major works of Plato and Aristotle. PHIL 10, PHIL 111, and PHIL 112 should be taken in order. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and department stamp or consent of instructor.

PHIL 111. History of Philosophy: Early Modern (4)
An examination of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century philosophy, focusing on major works of Descartes, Locke, and Hume. PHIL 110, PHIL 111, and PHIL 112 should be taken in order. Prerequisites: PHIL 110, upper-division standing and department stamp or consent of instructor.

PHIL 112. History of Philosophy: Late Modern (4)
An examination of late eighteenth and nineteenth-century philosophy, focusing on major works of Kant and Hegel. PHIL 110, PHIL 111, and PHIL 112 should be taken in order. Prerequisites: PHIL 111, upper-division standing and department stamp or consent of instructor.

PHIL 115. Philosophical Methods Seminar (4)
This course provides an introduction to the techniques of philosophical inquiry through detailed study of selected philosophical texts and through extensive training in philosophical writing based on those texts. Enrollment limited and restricted to majors; must be taken for letter grade. May not be repeated for credit. Prerequisites: open to philosophy majors only.

PHIL 120. Symbolic Logic I (4)
The syntax, semantics, and proof-theory of first order monadic and polyadic predicate logic. In this course, we will learn how to determine whether arguments that can be represented in first order predicate logic are deductively valid, how to symbolize English arguments, the rules of a natural deduction system, how to apply those rules to determine the logical status of symbolized arguments, and how to use semantic methods for determining validity and invalidity. Prerequisites: PHIL 10 or consent of instructor.

PHIL 122. Advanced Topics in Logic (4)
Topics vary from year to year. They include Metalogic (Mathematical Logic), Modal Logic, Foundations of Logic, Foundations of Set Theory, Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorems, and others. Prerequisites: PHIL 120 or consent of instructor.

PHIL 123. Philosophy of Logic (4)
Philosophical issues underlying standard and nonstandard logics, the nature of logical knowledge, the relation between logic and mathematics, the revisability of logic, truth and logic, ontological commitment and ontological relativity, logical consequence, etc. May be repeated for credit with change in content and approval of instructor. Prerequisites: PHIL 120 or consent of instructor.

PHIL 124. Philosophy of Mathematics (4)
The character of logical and mathematical truth and knowledge; the relations between logic and mathematics; the significance of Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorem; Platonism, logicism, and more recent approaches. Prerequisites: PHIL 120 or consent of instructor.

PHIL 125. Probability and Decision Theory (4)
A survey of theories of rational inference and rational choice, covering topics in probability and decision theory, formal epistemology, and statistics. This course provides an introduction to formal methods widely used in contemporary philosophy. May be taken for credit up to two times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 130. Metaphysics (4)
Central problems in metaphysics, such as free will and determinism, the mind-body problem, personal identity, causation, primary and secondary qualities, the nature of universals, necessity, and identity. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 131. Topics in Metaphysics (4)
An in-depth study of some central problem, figure, or tradition in metaphysics. May be repeated for credit with change of content and approval of instructor. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 132. Epistemology (4)
Central problems in epistemology such as skepticism; a priori knowledge; knowledge of other minds; self-knowledge; the problem of induction; foundationalist, coherence, and causal theories of knowledge. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 134. Philosophy of Language (4)
Examination of contemporary debates about meaning, reference, truth, and thought. Topics include descriptional theories of reference, sense and reference, compositionality, truth, theories of meaning, vagueness, metaphor, and natural and formal languages. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 136. Philosophy of Mind (4)
Different conceptions of the nature of mind and its relation to the physical world. Topics include identity theories, functionalism, eliminative materialism, internalism and externalism, subjectivity, other minds, consciousness, self-knowledge, perception, memory, and imagination. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 137. Moral Psychology (4)
The nature of action and psychological explanation. Topics include action individuation, reasons as causes, psychological laws, freedom and responsibility, weakness of will, self-deception, and the emotions. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 138. Responsibility (4)
A study of the nature and significance of responsibility. Possible topics include freedom, determinism, and responsibility; moral luck; responsibility and reactive attitudes such as blame and forgiveness; responsibility and situationism; moral and criminal responsibility; responsibility and excuse; insanity and psychopathy, immaturity, addiction, provocation, and duress. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 139. Global Justice (4)
Social justice issues as they arise across the borders of nation-states. Topics may include nationalism and cosmopolitanism, theories of just war and just warfare, issues of migration and immigration, global distributive justice and fair trade, and international cooperation in the face of global problems such as climate change and human rights violations. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 140. Free Will (4)
Investigation into the nature of free will, including arguments for and against its compatibility with a scientific picture of the world and competing accounts of the metaphysics of free will. Possible topics include disputes about the nature of free will; what it is for agents to cause actions; the nature of abilities or capacities to act; the relevance of neuroscience to accounts of free will; whether free will skepticism is a stable view; and experimental research on free will. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 141. The Meaning of Life (4)
This course considers whether human life has meaning, and, if so, what meaning it has and under what conditions such meaning may be secured. Negative proposals considered include that life is nothing but suffering, that it is absurd, that it has no meaning. Positive proposals considered include that meaning derives from free choices, from just being, from some passion, from something transcendent, or from human relationships or purposeless play or knowledge or achievement or morality. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 142. Philosophy of Emotion (4)
The nature, function, and value of emotion. Topics include theoretical approaches to defining (and distinguishing particular) emotions; the roles of emotions in structuring perception, cognition, and action; the rationality of emotion; morality and the emotions; emotions and mental/social well-being; and specific emotions such as fear or grief. May be taken for credit up to two times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 143. Philosophy of Perception (4)
The nature and function of perception. Topics include theoretical approaches to defining (and distinguishing particular) perceptual modalities; informational interactions within and between these modalities, and between perception and thought; the roles of perception in justifying knowledge about the world and guiding both thought and action; and the nature of perceptible qualities (colors, sounds, smells, tastes). Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 145. Philosophy of Science (4)
Central problems in philosophy of science, such as the nature of confirmation and explanation, the nature of scientific revolutions and progress, the unity of science, and realism and antirealism. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 146. Philosophy of Physics (4)
Philosophical problems in the development of modern physics, such as the philosophy of space and time, the epistemology of geometry, the philosophical significance of Einstein’s theory of relativity, the interpretation of quantum mechanics, and the significance of modern cosmology. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 147. Philosophy of Biology (4)
Philosophical problems in the biological sciences, such as the relation between biology and the physical sciences, the status and structure of evolutionary theory, and the role of biology in the social sciences. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 148. Philosophy and the Environment (4)
Investigation of ethical and epistemological questions concerning our relationship to the environment. Topics may include the value of nature, biodiversity, policy and science, and responsibility to future generations. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 149. Philosophy of Psychology (4)
Philosophical issues raised by psychology, including the nature of psychological explanation, the role of nature versus nurture, free will and determinism, and the unity of the person. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 150. Philosophy of the Cognitive Sciences (4)
Theoretical, empirical, methodological, and philosophical issues at work in the cognitive sciences (e.g., psychology, linguistics, neuroscience, artificial intelligence, and computer science), concerning things such as mental representation, consciousness, rationality, explanation, and nativism. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 151. Philosophy of Neuroscience (4)
An introduction to elementary neuroanatomy and neurophysiology and an examination of theoretical issues in cognitive neuroscience and their implications for traditional philosophical conceptions of the relation between mind and body, perception, consciousness, understanding, emotion, and the self. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 152. Philosophy of Social Science (4)
Philosophical issues of method and substance in the social sciences, such as causal and interpretive models of explanation, structuralism and methodological individualism, value neutrality, and relativism. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 155. Mexican Philosophy (4)
Introduction to Mexican philosophy with discussion of the work of such figures as Las Casas, Sor Juana Ines de la Cruz, Vasconcelos, Uranga, Zea, Villoro, Dussel, Hierro, Lara, and Hurtado. Topics may include historical movements, such as scholasticism, positivism, Mexican existentialism, and indigenous thought, as well as contemporary developments and the relationship to philosophy in the United States, Europe, and elsewhere.

PHIL 156. Latinx Philosophy (4)
Philosophical issues surrounding Latina/o/x peoples, which may include debates about the nature, function, and stability of this identity; social and political issues, such as immigration, economics, racial politics, and justice; phenomenological and existential accounts of latinidad; Latina feminism; and the relationship of these concerns to other philosophical traditions. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 157. Topics in Latin American and Latinx Philosophy (4)
A study and in-depth analysis of one or more figures or themes in Latin American or Latina/o/x/e philosophy. The focus may be on particular topics (liberation, indigeneity, immigration, the idea of regional or ethno-philosophy), figures (for example, Sor Juana, Vasconcelos, Mariategui), or themes in historical or contemporary philosophy (such as Mexican existentialism, philosophy of liberation, Latina feminism). Prerequisites: PHIL 35 or consent of instructor.

PHIL 158. Topics in Chinese Philosophy (4)
A study of one or more highly influential figures from Chinese philosophy, such as Confucius, Mozi, Mencius, Laozi, Zhuangzi, Xunzi, Han Feizi, and later Chinese thinkers. The focus may be on particular texts or intellectual themes and traditions. May be taken for credit up to two times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 159. Metaethics (4)
An examination of foundational questions about morality, including issues such as ethical objectivity; the relation between science and ethics; metaphysical, epistemological, and semantic issues about ethics; moral expertise; moral conflict; moral motivation; morality and practical reason; and the rational authority of morality. May be taken for credit up to two times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 160. Ethical Theory (4)
Systematic and/or historical perspectives on central issues in ethical theory such as deontic, contractualist, and consequentialist conceptions of morality; rights and special obligations; the role of happiness and virtue in morality; moral conflict; ethical objectivity and relativism; and the rational authority of morality. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 161. Topics in the History of Ethics (4)
Central issues and texts in the history of ethics. Subject matter can vary, ranging from one philosopher (e.g., Confucius, Aristotle, Kant, or Mill) to a historical tradition (e.g., Greek ethics or the British moralists). May be repeated for credit with change in content and approval of instructor. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 162. Contemporary Moral Issues (4)
An examination of contemporary moral issues, such as abortion, euthanasia, war, affirmative action, and freedom of speech. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 163. Biomedical Ethics (4)
Moral issues in medicine and the biological sciences, such as patient’s rights and physician’s responsibilities, abortion and euthanasia, the distribution of health care, experimentation, and genetic intervention. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 164. Technology and Human Values (4)
Philosophical issues involved in the development of modern science, the growth of technology, and control of the natural environment. The interaction of science and technology with human nature and political and moral ideals. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 165. Freedom, Equality, and the Law (4)
Examination of freedom and equality under the US Constitution, focusing on Supreme Court cases concerning discrimination on grounds of race, ethnic background, gender, undocumented status, wealth, and sexual orientation, and cases regarding contraceptives, abortion, interracial marriage, polygamy, and same-sex marriage. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 166. Classics in Political Philosophy (4)
Central issues about the justification, proper functions, and limits of the state through classic texts in the history of political philosophy by figures such as Plato, Aristotle, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, Marx, and Arendt. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 167. Contemporary Political Philosophy (4)
Different perspectives on central issues in contemporary political philosophy, such as the nature of state authority and political obligation, the limits of government and individual liberty, liberalism and its critics, equality and distributive justice. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 168. Philosophy of Law (4)
A study of issues in analytical jurisprudence such as the nature of law, the relation between law and morality, and the nature of legal interpretation and issues in normative jurisprudence such as the justification of punishment, paternalism and privacy, freedom of expression, and affirmative action. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 169. Feminism and Philosophy (4)
Philosophical examination of core concepts and theses in feminism, feminist philosophy, and critiques of traditional philosophical approaches to morality, politics, and science, from a feminist perspective. May also treat the historical development of feminist philosophy and its critiques. May be taken for credit two times with permission of instructor. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 170. Philosophy and Race (4)
A philosophical investigation of the topics of race and racism. The role of “race” in ordinary speech. The ethics of racial discourse. Anthropological and biological conceptions of race. The social and political significance of racial categories. Post-racialist conceptions of race. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 171. Topics in Philosophy of Law (4)
An in-depth analysis of one or more issues in philosophy of law. Topics might include legal positivism and natural law, legal and constitutional interpretation, judicial review within a constitutional democracy, First Amendment jurisprudence, substantive due process and equal protection, the limits of the criminal law, responsibility and punishment, psychiatry and the law, and the moral foundations of civil law. May be taken for credit up to two times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 172. Topics in Political Philosophy (4)
An in-depth analysis of a central problem, figure, or tradition in political philosophy. Topics may include minority rights, war and peace, political philosophy as it pertains to animals or the environment, immigration, ideal vs. non-ideal theory, or a detailed examination of a contemporary thinker or school of political thought. Content may vary. May be taken for credit up to two times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 173. Topics in Bioethics (4)
An in-depth exploration of an issue in bioethics. Topics will vary, and may include the ethics of genetic engineering, mental capacity and genuinely informed consent, the just distribution of health care, the ethics of geo-engineering, and the ethics of climate change and health. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 174. Data Ethics (4)
A survey of ethical issues arising in the collection, storage, analysis, consolidation, and application of data. Topics may include data as property and public resource, privacy and surveillance, data and discrimination, algorithms and fairness, and data regulation. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 175. Aesthetics (4)
Central issues in philosophical aesthetics such as the nature of art and aesthetic experience, the grounds of artistic interpretation and evaluation, artistic representation, and the role of the arts in education, culture, and politics. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 177. Philosophy and Literature (4)
A study of philosophical themes contained in selected fiction, drama, or poetry, and the philosophical issues that arise in the interpretation, appreciation, and criticism of literature. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 178. Topics in German Philosophy Translation—Intermediate (2)
Careful, line-by-line translation of passages of intermediate difficulty from German philosophical texts, both classic (Kant, Fichte, Hegel, Schopenhauer) and contemporary (Heidegger, Wittgenstein, Habermas). P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit six times as topics vary. LIGM 1D or equivalent level of study recommended. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and preauthorization.

PHIL 179. Topics in German Philosophy Translation—Advanced (2)
Continuation of PHIL 178 in the careful, line-by-line translation of passages of advanced difficulty from German philosophical texts, both classic (Kant, Fichte, Hegel, Schopenhauer) and contemporary (Heidegger, Wittgenstein, Habermas). May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Prerequisites: consent of instructor or completion of PHIL 178.

PHIL 180. Phenomenology (4)
An examination of the phenomenological tradition through the works of its major classical and/or contemporary representatives. Authors studied will vary and may include Brentano, Husserl, Heidegger, Stein, Merleau-Ponty, Levinas, and Irigaray. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 181. Existentialism (4)
Classical texts and issues of existentialism. Authors studied will vary and may include Nietzsche, Kierkegaard, Heidegger, Sartre, de Beauvoir, and Fanon. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 183. Topics in Continental Philosophy (4)
The focus will be on a leading movement in continental philosophy (e.g., the critical theory of the Frankfurt school, structuralism and deconstruction, postmodernism) or some particular issue that has figured in these traditions (e.g., freedom, subjectivity, historicity, authenticity). May be repeated for credit with change in content and approval of instructor. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 185. Philosophy of Religion (4)
A general introduction to the philosophy of religion through the study of classical and/or contemporary texts. Among the issues to be discussed are the existence and nature of God, the problem of evil, the existence of miracles, the relation between reason and revelation, and the nature of religious language. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

PHIL 191A. Philosophy Honors (4)
Independent study by special arrangement with and under the supervision of a faculty member, including a proposal for the honors essay. An IP grade will be awarded at the end of this quarter; a final grade will be given for both quarters at the end of 191B. Prerequisites: department stamp; consent of instructor.

PHIL 191B. The Honors Essay (4)
Continuation of 191A: independent study by special arrangement with and under the supervision of a faculty member, leading to the completion of the honors essay. A letter grade for both 191A and 191B will be given at the end of this quarter. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

PHIL 195. Introduction to Teaching Philosophy (4)
Under the supervision of the instructor, student will lead one discussion section of a lower-division philosophy class. The student must attend the lecture for the class and meet regularly with the instructor. Applications are available in the Department of Philosophy. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and department chair, GPA of 3.0 or higher, over ninety units.

PHIL 199. Directed Individual Study in Philosophy (4)
Directed individual study by special arrangement with and under the supervision of a faculty member. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

PHYS 1AL. Mechanics Laboratory (2)
Physics laboratory course to accompany PHYS 1A. Experiments in Mechanics. PHYS 1A and 1AL are designed to be taken concurrently but may be taken in separate terms; taking the lecture before the lab is the best alternative to enrolling in both. Students continuing to PHYS 1B/1BL will also need MATH 10B or 20B. Prerequisites: MATH 10A or 20A. Recommended preparation: concurrent or prior enrollment in PHYS 1A and MATH 10B or 20B.

PHYS 1B. Electricity and Magnetism (3)
Second quarter of a three-quarter introductory physics course geared toward life-science majors. Electric fields, magnetic fields, DC and AC circuitry. PHYS 1B and 1BL are designed to be taken concurrently but may be taken in separate terms; taking the lecture before the lab is the best alternative to enrolling in both. Prerequisites: PHYS 1A or 2A, and MATH 10B or 20B.

PHYS 1BL. Electricity and Magnetism Laboratory (2)
Physics laboratory course to accompany PHYS 1B. Experiments in electricity and magnetism. Program or materials fee may apply. PHYS 1B and 1BL are designed to be taken concurrently but may be taken in separate terms; taking the lecture before the lab is the best alternative to enrolling in both. Prerequisites: PHYS 1A or 2A, 1AL or 2BL, and MATH 10B or 20B. Recommended preparation: concurrent or prior enrollment in PHYS 1B.

PHYS 1C. Waves, Optics, and Modern Physics (3)
Third quarter of a three-quarter introductory physics course geared toward life-science majors. The physics of oscillations and waves, vibrating strings and sound, and the interaction of light with matter as illustrated through optics and quantum mechanics. Examples from biology, sports, medicine, and current events. PHYS 1C and 1CL are designed to be taken concurrently but may be taken in separate terms; taking the lecture before the lab is the best alternative to enrolling in both. Prerequisites: PHYS 1B or 2B, and MATH 10B or 20B.

PHYS 1CL. Waves, Optics, and Modern Physics Laboratory (2)
Physics laboratory course to accompany PHYS 1C. Experiments in waves, optics, and modern physics. Program or materials fee may apply. PHYS 1C and 1CL are designed to be taken concurrently but may be taken in separate terms; taking the lecture before the lab is the best alternative to enrolling in both. Prerequisites: PHYS 1B or 2B, 1BL or 2CL, and MATH 10B or 20B. Recommended preparation: concurrent or prior enrollment in PHYS 1C.

PHYS 2A. Physics—Mechanics (4)
A calculus-based science-engineering general physics course covering vectors, motion in one and two dimensions, Newton’s first and second laws, work and energy, conservation of energy, linear momentum, collisions, rotational kinematics, rotational dynamics, equilibrium of rigid bodies, oscillations, gravitation. Students continuing to PHYS 2B/4B will also need MATH 20B. Students will not receive credit for both PHYS 2A and PHYS 2AR. Prerequisites: MATH 10A-B or 20A or 20B or 20C or 31BH. Recommended preparation: prior or concurrent enrollment in MATH 20B.

PHYS 2AR. Physics—Mechanics (distance education) (4)
A calculus-based science-engineering general physics course covering vectors, motion in one and two dimensions, Newton’s first and second laws, work and energy, conservation of energy, linear momentum, collisions, rotational kinematics, rotational dynamics, equilibrium of rigid bodies, oscillations, gravitation. This course is a distance education course. Students continuing to PHYS 2B/4B will also need MATH 20B. Students will not receive credit for both PHYS 2AR and PHYS 2A. Prerequisites: MATH 10A-B or 20A or 20B or 20C or 31BH. Recommended preparation: prior or concurrent enrollment in MATH 20B.

PHYS 2B. Physics—Electricity and Magnetism (4)
Continuation of PHYS 2A covering charge and matter, the electric field, Gauss’s law, electric potential, capacitors and dielectrics, current and resistance, electromotive force and circuits, the magnetic field, Ampere’s law, Faraday’s law, inductance, electromagnetic oscillations, alternating currents and Maxwell’s equations. Students continuing to PHYS 2C will also need MATH 20C or 31BH. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A or 4A and MATH 20B or 20C or 31BH. Recommended preparation: prior or concurrent enrollment in MATH 20C or 31BH.

PHYS 2BL. Physics Laboratory—Mechanics (2)
Experiments include gravitational force, linear and rotational motion, conservation of energy and momentum, collisions, oscillations and springs, gyroscopes. Data reduction and error analysis are required for written laboratory reports. One hour lecture and three hours laboratory. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A or 4A. Recommended preparation: prior or concurrent enrollment in PHYS 2B or 4C.

PHYS 2C. Physics—Fluids, Waves, Thermodynamics, and Optics (4)
Continuation of PHYS 2B covering fluid mechanics, waves in elastic media, sound waves, temperature, heat and the first law of thermodynamics, kinetic theory of gases, entropy and the second law of thermodynamics, Maxwell’s equations, electromagnetic waves, geometric optics, interference and diffraction. Students continuing to PHYS 2D will need MATH 20D. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A or 4A, and MATH 20C or 31BH. Recommended preparation: prior or concurrent enrollment in MATH 20D. Prior completion of PHYS 2B is strongly recommended.

PHYS 2CL. Physics Laboratory—Electricity and Magnetism (2)
Experiments on L-R-C circuits; oscillations, resonance and damping, measurement of magnetic fields. One hour lecture and three hours laboratory. Program or materials fee may apply. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A or 4A, and 2B or 4C. Recommended preparation: prior or concurrent enrollment in PHYS 2C or 4D.

PHYS 2D. Physics—Relativity and Quantum Physics (4)
A modern physics course covering atomic view of matter, electricity and radiation, atomic models of Rutherford and Bohr, relativity, X-rays, wave and particle duality, matter waves, Schrödinger’s equation, atomic view of solids, natural radioactivity. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A or 4A, 2B, and MATH 20D. Recommended preparation: prior or concurrent enrollment in MATH 20E.

PHYS 2DL. Physics Laboratory—Modern Physics (2)
Experiments to be chosen from refraction, diffraction and interference of microwaves, Hall effect, thermal band gap, optical spectra, coherence of light, photoelectric effect, e/m ratio of particles, radioactive decays, and plasma physics. One hour lecture and three hours laboratory. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: PHYS 2BL or 2CL. Recommended preparation: prior or concurrent enrollment in PHYS 2D or 4E.

PHYS 4A. Physics for Physics Majors–Mechanics (4)
The first quarter of a five-quarter calculus-based physics sequence for physics majors and students with a serious interest in physics. The topics covered are vectors, particle kinematics and dynamics, work and energy, conservation of energy, conservation of momentum, collisions, rotational kinematics and dynamics, equilibrium of rigid bodies, small oscillations, gravitation, and central force motion. Prerequisites: MATH 20A. Recommended preparation: prior or concurrent enrollment in MATH 20B and a knowledge of vectors.

PHYS 4B. Physics for Physics Majors—Fluids, Waves, Statistical and Thermal Physics (4)
Continuation of PHYS 4A covering forced and damped oscillations, fluid statics and dynamics, waves in elastic media, sound waves, heat and the first law of thermodynamics, kinetic theory of gases, Brownian motion, Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, second law of thermodynamics. Students continuing to PHYS 4C will also need MATH 18 or 20F or 31AH. Prerequisites: PHYS 4A and MATH 20A-B. Recommended preparation: prior or concurrent enrollment in MATH 20C or 31BH.

PHYS 4C. Physics for Physics Majors—Electricity and Magnetism (4)
Continuation of PHYS 4B covering charge and Coulomb’s law, electric field, Gauss’s law, electric potential, capacitors and dielectrics, current and resistance, magnetic field, Ampere’s law, Faraday’s law, inductance, AC circuits. Prerequisites: PHYS 4A-B, MATH 20A-B-C or 31BH, and 18 or 20F or 31AH. Recommended preparation: prior or concurrent enrollment in MATH 20E or 31CH.

PHYS 4D. Physics for Physics Majors—Electromagnetic Waves, Special Relativity and Optics (4)
Continuation of PHYS 4C covering electric and magnetic fields in matter, Maxwell’s equations and electromagnetic waves, special relativity and its applications to electromagnetism, optics, interference, diffraction. Prerequisites: PHYS 4A-B-C, MATH 20A-B-C or 31BH, 20E or 31CH, and 18 or 20F or 31AH. Recommended preparation: prior or concurrent enrollment in MATH 20D.

PHYS 4E. Physics for Physics Majors—Quantum Physics (4)
Continuation of PHYS 4D covering experimental basis of quantum mechanics: Schrodinger equation and simple applications; spin; identical particles, Fermi and Bose distributions, density matrix, pure and mixed states, entangled states and EPR. Prerequisites: PHYS 4A-B-C-D, MATH 20A-B-C or 31BH, 20D, 20E or 31CH, and 18 or 20F or 31AH.

PHYS 5. Stars and Black Holes (4)
An introduction to the evolution of stars, including their birth and death. Topics include constellations, the atom and light, telescopes, stellar birth, stellar evolution, white dwarfs, neutron stars, black holes, and general relativity. This course uses basic algebra, proportion, radians, logs, and powers. PHYS 5, 7, 9, and 13 form a four-quarter sequence and can be taken individually in any order.

PHYS 7. Galaxies and Cosmology (4)
An introduction to galaxies and cosmology. Topics include the Milky Way, galaxy types and distances, dark matter, large scale structure, the expansion of the Universe, dark energy, and the early Universe. This course uses basic algebra, proportion, radians, logs and powers. PHYS 5, 7, 9, and 13 form a four-quarter sequence and can be taken individually in any order.

PHYS 8. Physics of Everyday Life (4)
Examines phenomena and technology encountered in daily life from a physics perspective. Topics include waves, musical instruments, telecommunication, sports, appliances, transportation, computers, and energy sources. Physics concepts will be introduced and discussed as needed employing some algebra. No prior physics knowledge is required.

PHYS 9. The Solar System (4)
An exploration of our solar system. Topics include the Sun, terrestrial and giant planets, satellites, asteroids, comets, dwarf planets and the Kuiper Belt, exoplanets, and the formation of planetary systems. This course uses basic algebra, proportion, radians, logs and powers. PHYS 5, 7, 9, and 13 form a four-quarter sequence and can be taken individually in any order.

PHYS 10. Concepts in Physics (4)
This is a one-quarter general physics course for nonscience majors. Topics covered are motion, energy, heat, waves, electric current, radiation, light, atoms and molecules, nuclear fission and fusion. This course emphasizes concepts with minimal mathematical formulation. Recommended preparation: college algebra.

PHYS 11. Survey of Physics (4)
Survey of physics for nonscience majors with strong mathematical background, including calculus. PHYS 11 describes the laws of motion, gravity, energy, momentum, and relativity. A laboratory component consists of two experiments with gravity and conservation principles. Prerequisites: MATH 10A or 20A. Corequisites: MATH 10B or 20B.

PHYS 12. Energy and the Environment (4)
A course covering energy fundamentals, energy use in an industrial society and the impact of large-scale energy consumption. It addresses topics on fossil fuel, heat engines, solar energy, nuclear energy, energy conservation, transportation, air pollution and global effects. Concepts and quantitative analysis.

PHYS 13. Life in the Universe (4)
An exploration of life in the Universe. Topics include defining life; the origin, development, and fundamental characteristics of life on Earth; searches for life elsewhere in the solar system and other planetary systems; space exploration; and identifying extraterrestrial intelligence. This course uses basic algebra, proportion, radians, logs, and powers. PHYS 5, 7, 9, and 13 form a four-quarter sequence and can be taken individually in any order.

PHYS 30. Poetry for Physicists (4)
Physicists have spoken of the beauty of equations. The poet John Keats wrote, “Beauty is truth, truth beauty...” What did they mean? Students will consider such questions while reading relevant essays and poems. Requirements include one creative exercise or presentation. Cross-listed with LTEN 30. Students cannot earn credit for both PHYS 30 and LTEN 30. Prerequisites: CAT 2 or DOC 2 or HUM 1 or MCWP 40 or MMW 12 or WARR 11A or WCWP 10A and CAT 3 or DOC 3 or HUM 2 or MCWP 50 or MMW 13 or WARR 11B or WCWP 10B.

PHYS 39. Physics Introductory Special Topics (1–5)
From time to time a member of the regular faculty or a resident visitor will give a self-contained course on an introductory topic in their special area of research or help students prepare to succeed in the physics major. Open to major codes PY26, PY28, PY29, PY30, PY31, PY32, PY33, and PY34 only. May be repeated up to six times, provided the same topic is not repeated.

PHYS 39L. Physics Introductory Special Topics Lab (1–5)
From time to time a member of the regular faculty or a resident visitor will offer a freshman-sophomore-level experimental lab in their special area of research. Open to major codes PY26, PY28, PY29, PY30, PY31, PY32, PY33, and PY34 only. May be repeated up to six times, provided the same topic is not repeated.

PHYS 87. First-year Seminar in Physics (1)
The First-year Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year seminars can be offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Students may complete up to four first-year seminars with the stipulation that none of the seminars are repeated.

PHYS 98. Directed Group Study in Physics (2)
Directed group study on a topic, or in a field not included in the regular departmental curriculum. P/NP grades only.

PHYS 99. Independent Study in Physics (2)
Independent reading or research on a topic by special arrangement with a faculty member. P/NP grading only. Prerequisites: lower-division standing. Completion of thirty units at UC San Diego undergraduate study, a minimum UC San Diego GPA of 3.0, and a completed and approved Special Studies form. Department stamp required.

PHYS 100A. Electromagnetism I (4)
Coulomb’s law, electric fields, electrostatics; conductors and dielectrics; steady currents, elements of circuit theory. Prerequisites: PHYS 4A-B-C-D; MATH 20A, 20B, 20C or 31BH, 20D, 20E or 31CH, and 18 or 20F or 31AH. Open to major codes PY26, PY28, PY29, PY30, PY31, PY32, PY33, and PY34 only.

PHYS 100B. Electromagnetism II (4)
Magnetic fields and magnetostatics, magnetic materials, induction, AC circuits, displacement currents; development of Maxwell’s equations. Prerequisites: PHYS 100A, MATH 20A, 20B, 20C or 31BH, 20D, 20E or 31CH, and 18 or 20F or 31AH. Open to major codes PY26, PY28, PY29, PY30, PY31, PY32, PY33, and PY34 only.

PHYS 100C. Electromagnetism III (4)
Electromagnetic waves, radiation theory; application to optics; motion of charged particles in electromagnetic fields; relation of electromagnetism to relativistic concepts. Prerequisites: PHYS 100B. Open to major codes PY26, PY28, PY29, PY30, PY31, PY32, PY33, and PY34 only.

PHYS 105A. Mathematical and Computational Physics I (4)
A combined analytic and mathematically based numerical approach to the solution of common applied mathematics problems in physics and engineering. Topics: Fourier series and integrals, special functions, initial and boundary value problems, Green’s functions; heat, Laplace and wave equations. Prerequisites: PHYS 4B-C-D-E, MATH 20A-B-C or 31BH, 20D, 20E or 31CH, and 18 or 20F or 31AH. Open to major codes PY26, PY28, PY29, PY30, PY31, PY32, PY33, and PY34 only.

PHYS 105B. Mathematical and Computational Physics II (4)
A continuation of PHYS 105A covering selected advanced topics in applied mathematical and numerical methods. Topics include statistics, diffusion and Monte-Carlo simulations; Laplace equation and numerical methods for nonseparable geometries; waves in inhomogeneous media, WKB analysis; nonlinear systems and chaos. Prerequisites: PHYS 105A, MATH 20A-B-C or 31BH, 20D, 20E or 31CH, and 18 or 20F or 31AH. Open to major codes PY26, PY28, PY29, PY30, PY31, PY32, PY33, and PY34 only.

PHYS 110A. Mechanics I (4)
Phase flows, bifurcations, linear oscillations, calculus of variations, Lagrangian dynamics, conservation laws, central forces, systems of particles, collisions, coupled oscillations. Prerequisites: PHYS 4A-B-C-D, MATH 20A-B-C or 31BH, 20D, 20E or 31CH, and 18 or 20F or 31AH. Open to major codes PY26, PY28, PY29, PY30, PY31, PY32, PY33, and PY34 only.

PHYS 110B. Mechanics II (4)
Noninertial reference systems, dynamics of rigid bodies, Hamilton’s equations, Liouville’s theorem, chaos, continuum mechanics, special relativity. Prerequisites: PHYS 110A, MATH 20A-B-C or 31BH, 20D, 20E or 31CH, and 18 or 20F or 31AH. Open to major codes PY26, PY28, PY29, PY30, PY31, PY32, PY33, and PY34 only.

PHYS 111. Introduction to Ocean Waves (4)
The linear theory of ocean surface waves, including group velocity, wave dispersion, ray theory, wave measurement and prediction, shoaling waves, giant waves, ship wakes, tsunamis, and the physics of the surf zone. Cross-listed with SIO 111. Students may not receive credit for SIO 111 and PHYS 111. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A-B-C or 4A-B-C, MATH 20A-B-C or 31BH, 20D, and 20E or 31CH.

PHYS 113. Quantum Information is Physical (4)
The subject of the course is physical aspects of quantum information. Following a primer on Shannon’s theory on the compression and transmission of information, emphasizing its physical nature, the theory is extended to quantum systems. This includes measures of entanglement and their operational meanings, purification, and strong subadditivity of the von Neumann entropy. Further topics may include applications to quantum many-body physics, quantum algorithms, and quantum complexity theory. May be coscheduled with PHYS 213. Prerequisites: PHYS 130A-B.

PHYS 116. Fluid Dynamics for Physicists (4)
This is a basic course in fluid dynamics for advanced students. The course consists of core fundamentals and modules on advanced applications to physical and biological phenomena. Core fundamentals include Euler and Navier-Stokes equations, potential and Stokesian flow, instabilities, boundary layers, turbulence, and shocks. Module topics include MHD, waves, and the physics of locomotion and olfaction. May be coscheduled with PHYS 216. Students with equivalent prerequisite knowledge may use the Enrollment Authorization System (EASy) to request approval to enroll. Prerequisites: PHYS 100B and 110B.

PHYS 120. Circuits and Electronics (5)
Laboratory and lecture course that covers principles of analog circuit theory and design, linear systems theory, and practical aspects of circuit realization, debugging, and characterization. Laboratory exercises include passive circuits, active filters and amplifiers with discrete and monolithic devices, nonlinear circuits, interfaces to sensors and actuators, and the digitization of analog signals. PHYS 120 was formerly numbered PHYS 120A. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: PHYS 4A-B-C, and 2CL. Open to major codes PY26, PY28, PY29, PY30, PY31, PY32, PY33, and PY34 only. Recommended preparation: PHYS 100A.

PHYS 122. Experimental Techniques (4)
Laboratory-lecture course covering practical techniques used in research laboratories. Possible topics include computer interfacing of instruments, sensors, and actuators; programming for data acquisition/analysis; electronics; measurement techniques; mechanical design/machining; mechanics of materials; thermal design/control; vacuum/cryogenic techniques; optics; particle detection. PHYS 122 was formerly numbered PHYS 121. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: PHYS 120.

PHYS 124. Laboratory Projects (4)
A laboratory-lecture-project course featuring creation of an experimental apparatus in teams of about two. Emphasis is on electronic sensing of the physical environment and actuating physical responses. The course will use a computer interface such as the Arduino. PHYS 124 was formerly numbered PHYS 120B. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: PHYS 120.

PHYS 130A. Quantum Physics I (4)
Development of quantum mechanics. Wave mechanics; measurement postulate and measurement problem. Piece-wise constant potentials, simple harmonic oscillator, central field and the hydrogen atom. Three hours lecture, one-hour discussion session. Prerequisites: PHYS 4A-B-C-D-E, 100A, 110A. Open to major codes PY26, PY28, PY29, PY30, PY31, PY32, PY33, and PY34 only.

PHYS 130B. Quantum Physics II (4)
Matrix mechanics, angular momentum, spin, and the two-state system. Approximation methods and the hydrogen spectrum. Identical particles, atomic and nuclear structures. Scattering theory. Three hours lecture, one-hour discussion session. Prerequisites: PHYS 100B and 130A. Open to major codes PY26, PY28, PY29, PY30, PY31, PY32, PY33, and PY34 only.

PHYS 130C. Quantum Physics III (4)
Quantized electromagnetic fields and introductory quantum optics. Symmetry and conservation laws. Introductory many-body physics. Density matrix, quantum coherence and dissipation. The relativistic electron. Three-hour lecture, one-hour discussion session. Prerequisites: PHYS 130B.

PHYS 133. Condensed Matter/Materials Science Laboratory (4)
A project-oriented laboratory course utilizing state-of-the-art experimental techniques in materials science. The course prepares students for research in a modern condensed matter-materials science laboratory. Under supervision, the students develop their own experimental ideas after investigating current research literature. With the use of sophisticated state-of-the-art instrumentation students conduct research, write a research paper, and make verbal presentations. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: PHYS 2CL and 2DL.

PHYS 137. String Theory (4)
Quantum mechanics and gravity. Electromagnetism from gravity and extra dimensions. Unification of forces. Quantum black holes. Properties of strings and branes. Prerequisites: PHYS 100A, 110A, and 130A.

PHYS 139. Physics Special Topics (4)
From time to time a member of the regular faculty or a resident visitor will give a self-contained short course on a topic in his or her special area of research. This course is not offered on a regular basis, but it is estimated that it will be given once each academic year. Course may be taken for credit up to two times as topics vary (the course subtitle will be different for each distinct topic). Students who repeat the same topic in PHYS 139 will have the duplicate credit removed from their academic record. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A-B-C-D or 4A-B-C-D-E, MATH 20A-B-C or 31BH, and 18 or 20F or 31AH.

PHYS 140A. Statistical and Thermal Physics I (4)
Integrated treatment of thermodynamics and statistical mechanics; statistical treatment of entropy, review of elementary probability theory, canonical distribution, partition function, free energy, phase equilibrium, introduction to ideal quantum gases. Prerequisites: PHYS 130A. Open to major codes PY26, PY28, PY29, PY30, PY31, PY32, PY33, and PY34 only.

PHYS 140B. Statistical and Thermal Physics II (4)
Applications of the theory of ideal quantum gases in condensed matter physics, nuclear physics and astrophysics; advanced thermodynamics, the third law, chemical equilibrium, low temperature physics; kinetic theory and transport in nonequilibrium systems; introduction to critical phenomena including mean field theory. Prerequisites: PHYS 130B and 140A. Open to major codes PY26, PY28, PY29, PY30, PY31, PY32, PY33, and PY34 only.

PHYS 141. Computational Physics I: Probabilistic Models and Simulations (4)
Project-based computational physics laboratory course with student’s choice of Fortran 90/95, or C/C++. Applications from materials science to the structure of the early universe are chosen from molecular dynamics, classical and quantum Monte Carlo methods, physical Langevin/Fokker-Planck processes. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PHYS 142. Computational Physics II: PDE and Matrix Models (4)
Project-based computational physics laboratory course for modern physics and engineering problems with student’s choice of Fortran90/95, or C/C++. Applications of finite element PDE models are chosen from quantum mechanics and nanodevices, fluid dynamics, electromagnetism, materials physics, and other modern topics. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PHYS 151. Elementary Plasma Physics (4)
Particle motions, plasmas as fluids, waves, diffusion, equilibrium and stability, nonlinear effects, controlled fusion. Cross-listed with MAE 117A. Students will not receive credit for both MAE 117A and PHYS 151. Prerequisites: MATH 20D.

PHYS 152A. Condensed Matter Physics (4)
Physics of the solid-state. Binding mechanisms, crystal structures and symmetries, diffraction, reciprocal space, phonons, free and nearly free electron models, energy bands, solid-state thermodynamics, kinetic theory and transport, semiconductors. Prerequisites: PHYS 130A or CHEM 130. Corequisites: PHYS 140A.

PHYS 152B. Electronic Materials (4)
Physics of electronic materials. Semiconductors: bands, donors and acceptors, devices. Metals: Fermi surface, screening, optical properties. Insulators: dia-/ferro-electrics, displacive transitions. Magnets: dia-/para-/ferro-/antiferro-magnetism, phase transitions, low temperature properties. Superconductors: pairing, Meissner effect, flux quantization, BCS theory. Prerequisites: PHYS 152A.

PHYS 154. Elementary Particle Physics (4)
The constituents of matter (quarks and leptons) and their interactions (strong, electromagnetic, and weak). Symmetries and conservation laws. Fundamental processes involving quarks and leptons. Unification of weak and electromagnetic interactions. Particle-astrophysics and the Big Bang. Prerequisites: PHYS 130B.

PHYS 160. Stellar Astrophysics (4)
Introduction to stellar astrophysics: observational properties of stars, solar physics, radiation and energy transport in stars, stellar spectroscopy, nuclear processes in stars, stellar structure and evolution, degenerate matter and compact stellar objects, supernovae and nucleosynthesis. PHYS 160, 161, 162, and 163 may be taken as a four-quarter sequence for students interested in pursuing graduate study in astrophysics or individually as topics of interest. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A-B-C-D or 4A-B-C-D-E.

PHYS 161. Black Holes (4)
An introduction to Einstein’s theory of general relativity with emphasis on the physics of black holes. Topics will include metrics and curved space-time, the Schwarzchild metric, motion around and inside black holes, rotating black holes, gravitational lensing, gravity waves, Hawking radiation, and observations of black holes. PHYS 160, 161, 162, and 163 may be taken as a four-quarter sequence for students interested in pursuing graduate study in astrophysics or individually as topics of interest. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A-B-C-D or 4A-B-C-D-E.

PHYS 162. Cosmology (4)
The expanding Universe, the Friedman-Robertson-Walker equations, dark matter, dark energy, and the formation of galaxies and large-scale structure. Topics in observational cosmology, including how to measure distances and times, and the age, density, and size of the Universe. Topics in the early Universe, including the cosmic microwave background, creation of the elements, cosmic inflation, the big bang. PHYS 160, 161, 162, and 163 may be taken as a four-quarter sequence for students interested in pursuing graduate study in astrophysics or individually as topics of interest. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A-B-C-D or 4A-B-C-D-E.

PHYS 163. Galaxies and Quasars (4)
An introduction to the structure and properties of galaxies in the universe. Topics covered include the Milky Way, the interstellar medium, properties of spiral and elliptical galaxies, rotation curves, starburst galaxies, galaxy formation and evolution, large-scale structure, and active galaxies and quasars. PHYS 160, 161, 162, and 163 may be taken as a four-quarter sequence in any order for students interested in pursuing graduate study in astrophysics or individually as topics of interest. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A-B-C-D or 4A-B-C-D-E.

PHYS 164. Observational Astrophysics Research Lab (4)
Project-based course developing tools and techniques of observational astrophysical research: photon counting, imaging, spectroscopy, astrometry; collecting data at the telescope; data reduction and analysis; probability functions; error analysis techniques; and scientific writing. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A-B-C-D or 4A-B-C-D-E. Recommended preparation: concurrent enrollment or completion of one course from PHYS 160, 161, 162, or 163 is recommended.

PHYS 170. Medical Instruments: Principles and Practice (4)
The principles and clinical applications of medical diagnostic instruments, including electromagnetic measurements, spectroscopy, microscopy; ultrasounds, X-rays, MRI, tomography, lasers in surgery, fiber optics in diagnostics. Prerequisites: PHYS 1B or 2B or 4C, and 1C or 2C or 4B.

PHYS 173. Modern Physics Laboratory: Biological and Quantum Physics (4)
A selection of experiments in contemporary physics and biophysics. Students select among pulsed NMR, Mossbauer, Zeeman effect, light scattering, holography, optical trapping, voltage clamp and genetic transcription of ion channels in oocytes, fluorescent imaging, and flight control in flies. Prerequisites: PHYS 120 and BILD 1 and CHEM 7L.

PHYS 175. Biological Physics (4)
The course teaches how a few fundamental models from statistical physics provide quantitative explanatory frameworks for many seemingly unrelated problems in biology. Case studies rotate from year to year and may include ion channel gating, cooperative binding, protein-DNA interaction, gene regulation, molecular motor dynamics, cytoskeletal assembly, biological electricity, population and evolutionary dynamics. May be coscheduled with PHYS 275. Prerequisites: CHEM 126 or 131 or 132 or the combination of PHYS 100A and 110A. Recommended preparation: prior or concurrent enrollment in PHYS 140A.

PHYS 176. Quantitative Microbiology (4)
A quantitative description of bacteria from molecular interactions through cellular and population level behaviors. Topics will vary yearly, covering process including gene regulation, molecular signaling, genetic circuits, stochastic dynamics, metabolic control, cell division, cell growth control, stress response, chemotaxis, biofilm formation. May be coscheduled with PHYS 276. Prerequisites: PHYS 140A. Recommended preparation: an introductory course in statistical mechanics or equivalent; ordinary differential equations.

PHYS 177. Physics of the Cell (4)
Exploration of the physics problems that must be solved by a living cell in order to survive. Theoretical ideas from nonequilibrium statistical mechanics and dynamical systems are used to establish the physical principles that underlie biological function, focusing on the organization and behavior of eukaryotic cells. Specific topics rotate from year to year and may include genome organization and dynamics, motility, sensing, and organelle interaction. May be coscheduled with PHYS 277. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Recommended preparation: familiarity with statistical mechanics at the level of PHYS 140A or CHEM 132.

PHYS 178. Biophysics of Neurons and Networks (4)
Information processing by nervous system through physical reasoning and mathematical analysis. A review of the biophysics of neurons and synapses and fundamental limits to signaling by nervous systems is followed by essential aspects of the dynamics of phase coupled neuronal oscillators, the dynamics and computational capabilities of recurrent neuronal networks, and the computational capability of layered networks. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Recommended preparation: a working knowledge of calculus and linear algebra.

PHYS 191. Undergraduate Seminar on Physics (1)
Undergraduate seminars organized around the research interests of various faculty members. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A or 4A.

PHYS 192. Senior Seminar in Physics (1)
The Senior Seminar Program is designed to allow senior undergraduates to meet with faculty members in a small group setting to explore an intellectual topic in Physics (at the upper-division level). Senior Seminars may be offered in all campus departments. Topics will vary from quarter to quarter. Senior Seminars may be taken for credit up to four times, with a change in topic, and permission of the department. Enrollment is limited to twenty students, with preference given to seniors.

PHYS 198. Directed Group Study in Physics (2 or 4)
Directed group study on a topic or in a field not included in the regular departmental curriculum. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of instructor and departmental chair.

PHYS 199. Research for Undergraduates in Physics (2 or 4)
Independent reading or research on a problem by special arrangement with a faculty member. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of instructor and departmental chair.

PHYS 199H. Honors Thesis Research for Undergraduates in Physics (2–4)
Honors thesis research for seniors participating in the Honors Program. Research is conducted under the supervision of a physics faculty member. Prerequisites: admission to the Honors Program in Physics.

POLI 5 or 5D. Data Analytics for the Social Sciences (4)
Introduction to probability and analysis for understanding data in the social world. Students engage in hands-on learning with applied social science problems. Basics of probability, visual display of data, data collection and management, hypothesis testing, and computation. Students may receive credit for only one of the following courses: ECON 5, POLI 5, or POLI 5D.

POLI 10 or 10D. Introduction to Political Science: American Politics (4)
This course surveys the processes and institutions of American politics. Among the topics discussed are individual political attitudes and values, political participation, voting, parties, interest groups, Congress, presidency, Supreme Court, the federal bureaucracy, and domestic and foreign policy making. POLI 10 is Lecture only, and POLI 10D is Lecture plus Discussion section. These courses are equivalents of each other in regard to major requirements, and students may not receive credit for both 10 and 10D. 

POLI 11 or 11D. Introduction to Political Science: Comparative Politics (4)
The nature of political authority, the experience of a social revolution, and the achievement of an economic transformation will be explored in the context of politics and government in a number of different countries. POLI 11 is Lecture only, and POLI 11D is Lecture plus Discussion section. These courses are equivalents of each other in regard to major requirements, and students may not receive credit for both 11 and 11D. 

POLI 12 or 12D. Introduction to Political Science: International Relations (4)
The issues of war/peace, nationalism/internationalism, and economic growth/redistribution will be examined in both historical and theoretical perspectives. POLI 12 is Lecture only, and POLI 12D is Lecture plus Discussion section. These courses are equivalents of each other in regard to major requirements, and students may not receive credit for both 12 and 12D. 

POLI 13 or 13D. Power and Justice (4)
An exploration of the relationship between power and justice in modern society. Materials include classic and contemporary texts, films, and literature. POLI 13 is Lecture only, and POLI 13D is Lecture plus Discussion section. These courses are equivalents of each other in regard to major requirements, and students may not receive credit for both 13 and 13D. 

POLI 27. Ethics and Society (4)
An examination of ethical principles (e.g., utilitarianism, individual rights, etc.) and their social and political applications to contemporary issues such as abortion, environmental protection, and affirmative action. Ethical principles will also be applied to moral dilemmas familiar in government, law, business, and the professions. Satisfies the Warren College ethics and society requirement. Prerequisites: CAT 2 and 3, DOC 2 and 3, MCWP 40 and 50, HUM 1 and 2, MMW 2 and 3, WCWP 10A–B, or WARR 11A–B, SYN 1R and SYN 2R, CCE 1 and CCE 2.

POLI 28. Ethics and Society II (4)
An examination of a single set of major contemporary social, political, or economic issues (e.g., environmental ethics, international ethics) in light of ethical and moral principles and values. Warren College students must take course for a letter grade in order to satisfy the Warren College general-education requirement. Prerequisites: PHIL/POLI 27.

POLI 30 or 30D. Political Inquiry (4)
Introduction to the logic of inference in social science and to quantitative analysis in political science and public policy including research design, data collection, data description and computer graphics, and the logic of statistical inference (including linear regression). POLI 30 is Lecture only, and POLI 30D is Lecture plus Discussion section. These courses are equivalents of each other in regard to major requirements, and students may not receive credit for both 30 and 30D. 

POLI 40. Introduction to Law and Society (4)
This course is designed as a broad introduction to the study of law as a social institution and its relations to other institutions in society. The focus will be less on the substance of law (legal doctrine and judicial opinions) than on the process of law–how legal rules both reflect and shape basic social values and their relation to social, political, and economic conflicts within society.

POLI 87. First-year Student Seminar in Political Science (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students. May not be used to fulfill any major or minor requirements in political science.

POLI 90. Undergraduate Seminar in Political Science (4)
Selected topics to introduce students to current issues and trends in political science. May not be used to fulfill any major or minor requirements in political science. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit four times.

POLI 99H. Independent Study in Political Science (1)
Independent study or research under direction of a member of the faculty. Prerequisites: student must be of first-year class standing, and a Regents Scholar; approved Special Studies form.

POLI 100A. The Presidency (4)
The role of the presidency in American politics. Topics will include nomination and election politics, relations with Congress, party leadership, presidential control of the bureaucracy, international political role, and presidential psychology.

POLI 100B. The US Congress (4)
This course will examine the nomination and election of congressmen, constituent relationships, the development of the institution, formal and informal structures, leadership, comparisons of House with Senate, lobbying, and relationship with the executive branch.

POLI 100C. American Political Parties (4)
This course examines the development of the two major parties from 1789 to the present. Considers the nature of party coalitions, the role of leaders, activists, organizers, and voters, and the performance of parties in government.

POLI 100DA. Voting, Campaigning, and Elections (4)
A consideration of the nature of public opinion and voting in American government. Studies of voting behavior are examined from the viewpoints of both citizens and candidates, and attention is devoted to recent efforts to develop models of electoral behavior for the study of campaigns. The role of mass media and money also will be examined.

POLI 100E. Interest Group Politics (4)
The theory and practice of interest group politics in the United States. Theories of pluralism and collective action, the behavior and influence of lobbies, the role of political action committees, and other important aspects of group action in politics are examined. Prerequisites: sophomore standing.

POLI 100F. Social Networks (4)
This class explores the many ways in which face-to-face social networks have a powerful effect on a wide range of human behaviors. With a foundation in understanding real-world networks, we can then consider how these networks function online.

POLI 100G. How to Win or Lose an Election (4)
This course explores the various aspects of a political campaign including campaign organization, vote targeting, political parties, social media, fundraising, polling, media interactions, and more. These areas are examined citing specific examples from federal, state, and local campaigns.

POLI 100H. Race and Ethnicity in American Politics (4)
This course examines the processes by which racial and ethnic groups have/have not been incorporated into the American political system. The course focuses on the political experiences of European immigrant groups, blacks, Latinos, and Asians.

POLI 100I. Participation and Inequality (4)
This course examines the causes and consequences of the unequal participation and representation of groups in US politics. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 100J. Race in American Political Development (4)
Readings examine how the multiracial character of the United States has shaped the broad outlines of American politics. Cases include the founding/the Constitution, southern politics, social organization in formerly Mexican regions, the New Deal, consequences of limited suffrage. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 100K. Railroads and American Politics (4)
The railroads transformed the economy and politics of the United States in the nineteenth century. The railroads were the first big businesses, and their sheer size led inevitably to conflict with governments at all levels. This conflict shaped modern politics. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 100M. Political Psychology (4)
We begin with hypotheses about how people develop political attitudes, and methods to test those hypotheses. The second half focuses on emerging cognitive neuroscience insights, including brain imaging, and asks how these inform theories of political cognition, affect, and behavior. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 100N. Politics in Washington (4)
Examines Washington as a political community, its institutions, culture, and history. In addition to its elected officeholders and senior government officials, it examines Washington’s subcommunities: the national news industry, diplomatic service, the representation of interests. Prerequisites: department approval is required.

POLI 100O. Perspectives on Race (4)
This course looks at race in American politics from a variety of perspectives. We may consider psychological, genetic, neuroscience, economic, political, sociological, and legal views of what drives powerful dynamics of race in our country. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 100P. Economic Entrepreneurs and American Politics (4)
This course is concerned with the interaction between representative democracy and capitalism in American political history. The key to understanding this interaction is the role of the entrepreneur in the economy and how unexpected economic change shapes politics. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 100Q. Advanced Topics in Racial Politics (4)
This course explores how race shapes outcomes in American democracy through in-depth exploration of key issues in American politics. Topics include race in the voting booth, immigration, discrimination, and inter-minority conflict.

POLI 100T. Business and Politics (4)
This course uses the tools of political science and economics to study how corporations affect and are affected by politics. We will cover a broad range of issues, including regulation, lawmaking, mass media, interest group mobilization, and corporate social responsibility.

POLI 100U. Games, Strategy, and Politics (4)
This course provides an introduction to game theory with an emphasis on applications in economics, political science, and business. Game theory uses simple mathematical models to understand social phenomena. The required mathematical background is minimal (high school algebra).

POLI 100V. Organized Interests (4)
This course provides a theoretical and practical examination of political parties, interest groups, and social movements in the United States. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 100W. Politics, Policy, and Educational Inequality (4)
Education is often thought of as “the great equalizer” but in the U.S. and around the world, many governments fail to ensure that all citizens have access to high-quality educational opportunities. Why? This course will give students the conceptual tools to understand who shapes education policy decisions, through what channels, and how those policy decisions affect the quality and equity of education. Emphasis is on the U.S., but analyzed in comparative perspective. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 100X. Data Analysis and United States Politics (4)
This course examines US politics from a computational point of view. Through in-class work and hands-on assignments, we will use data analysis tools to collect, analyze, and visualize data related to various facets of federal level politics in the U.S. Students will develop statistical and computational skills that will assist them in advanced analyses of elections, legislative outcomes, lobbying, and other dynamics of the lawmaking process in Congress. Prerequisites: POLI 5D/POLI 5D/ECON 5 or POLI 30D.

POLI 100Y. Asian American Politics in the United States (4)
This class is a survey of historical and contemporary issues in Asian American politics in the U.S.; race and ethnicity in the context of US politics; comparisons of racial and ethnic group experiences in the U.S. with those experienced by racial and ethnic groups elsewhere; Asian American access to the political system through political participation. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 101E. The Politics of Race, Ethnicity, and Immigration (4)
This course examines the interplay between racial/ethnic identity and politics. How do race and ethnicity become politicized? What role does ethnic or racial identity play in political behavior and decision-making processes? To what extent do political institutions and institutional design reinforce the salience of ethnic or racial identity in politics? We will be taking a comparative approach to this topic, and cover readings in both American politics and comparative politics literature.

POLI 102C. American Political Development (4)
Examines selected issues and moments in the political history of the United States, comparing competing explanations and analyses of US politics. Likely topics include the founding, “American exceptionalism,” change in the party system, race in US politics, the “new institutionalism.”

POLI 102D. Voting Rights Act: Fifty Years Later (4)
The Voting Rights Act (VRA) is one of the most significant and controversial acts in American history. We will examine the environment that led to its introduction, the legislative process, executive implementation, and the political ramifications and subsequent state government and court decisions. 

POLI 102E. Urban Politics (4)
(Same as USP107) This survey course focuses upon the following six topics: the evolution of urban politics since the mid-nineteenth century; the urban fiscal crisis; federal/urban relationships; the “new” ethnic politics; urban power structure and leadership; and selected contemporary policy issues such as downtown redevelopment, poverty, and race.

POLI 102F. Mass Media and Politics (4)
This course will explore both the role played by mass media in political institutions, processes and behaviors, and reciprocally, the roles played by political systems in guiding communication processes.

POLI 102G. Special Topics in American Politics (4)
An undergraduate course designed to cover various aspects of American politics. May be repeated for credit two times, provided each course is a separate topic, for a maximum of twelve units.

POLI 102J. Advanced Topics in Urban Politics (4)
(Same as USP 110) Building upon the introductory urban politics course, the advanced topics course explores issues such as community power, minority empowerment, and the politics of growth. A research paper is required. Students may not receive credit for both POLI 102J and USP 110. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 102K. The Urban Underclass (4)
The lives of individuals living in ghetto poverty in the United States. Causes and consequences of ghetto poverty. Political debates surrounding the underclass and different possible solutions. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 102L. The Politics of Regulation (4)
Politics and policy-making issues in regulation. Themes: regulation versus legislation; general versus specific grants of regulatory power; market versus command mechanisms; private property; and risk assessment. Emphasis on American regulatory policy, examples from current regulatory debates (e.g., health care and environment). Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 103A. California Government and Politics (4)
This survey course explores six topics: 1) the state’s political history; 2) campaigning, the mass media, and elections; 3) actors and institutions in the making of state policy; 4) local government; 5) contemporary policy issues; e.g., Proposition 13, school desegregation, crime, housing and land use, transportation, water; 6) California’s role in national politics.

POLI 103B. Politics and Policymaking in Los Angeles (4)
(Same as USP 113) This course examines politics and policymaking in the five-county Los Angeles region. It explores the historical development of the city, suburbs, and region; politics, power, and governance; and major policy challenges facing the city and metropolitan area. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 103C. Politics and Policymaking in San Diego (4)
(Same as USP 115) This course examines how major policy decisions are made in San Diego. It analyzes the region’s power structure (including the roles of nongovernmental organizations and the media), governance systems and reform efforts, and the politics of major infrastructure projects. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

POLI 103D. California Local Government: Finance and Administration (4)
(Same as USP 116) This course surveys public finance and administration. It focuses upon California local governments—cities, counties, and special districts—and also examines state and federal relationships. Topics explored include revenue, expenditure, indebtedness, policy responsibilities, and administrative organization and processes. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 104A. The Supreme Court and the Constitution (4)
An introduction to the study of the Supreme Court and constitutional doctrine. Topics will include the nature of judicial review, federalism, race, and equal protection. The relation of judicial and legislative power will also be examined.

POLI 104B. Civil Liberties—Fundamental Rights (4)
This course will examine issues of civil liberties from both legal and political perspectives. Topics will include the First Amendment rights of speech, press, assembly, and religion; other “fundamental” rights, such as the right to privacy; and some issues in equal protection. Conflicts between governmental powers and individual rights will be examined.

POLI 104C. Civil Liberties—The Rights of the Accused and Minorities (4)
Examines the legal issues surrounding the rights of criminal suspects, as well as the rights of “marginal” groups such as aliens, illegal immigrants, and the mentally ill. Also includes a discussion of the nature of discrimination in American society. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 104D. Judicial Politics (4)
Introduction to the study of law and courts as political institutions and judges as political actors, including the role of the judiciary in our constitutional system and decision making both within the Supreme Court and within the judicial hierarchy.

POLI 104E. Environmental Law and Policy (4)
The course is an introduction to US environmental law at the federal level. It emphasizes issues and current controversies involving natural resources, such as wilderness, biodiversity, water, and climate change. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 104F. Constitutional Law (4)
This course provides an intensive examination of a major issue in constitutional law. Students will be required to do legal research on a topic, write a legal brief, and argue a case to the class. Prerequisites: POLI 104A-B.

POLI 104G. Election Law (4)
A detailed analysis of the legislative and judicial history of election related topics including registration laws, election administration, candidate requirements, voting rights, party organizational rules, nomination procedures, redistricting, and campaign finance. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 104I. Law and Politics—Courts and Political Controversy (4)
This course will examine the role of the courts in dealing with issues of great political controversy, with attention to the rights of speech and assembly during wartime, questions of internal security, and the expression of controversial views on race and religion. The conflict between opposing Supreme Court doctrines on these issues will be explored in the context of the case studies drawn from different historical periods.

POLI 104J. Introduction to Legal Reasoning (4)
The ability to write and argue is one of the noted benefits of a legal education. Students will learn the basics of legal research and reasoning by learning to read and brief case law and write persuasive and objective memorandums. Prerequisites: POLI 104A or 104B, upper-division standing. 

POLI 104K. Legal Argument Formulation (4)
This course examines the role that legal arguments have in the US court system. Students will utilize legal reasoning and research skills to craft arguments in both written and oral formats, and then participate in a moot court final. Prerequisites: POLI 104J.

POLI 104L. Positive Political Theory of Law (4)
We will discuss modern theories of the origins of law and legal behavior.

POLI 104M. Law and Sex (4)
How law regulates and impacts sexuality and orientation with focus on constitutional law in areas of privacy, free speech, association, regulation of sexual conduct under criminal law pornography, procreation, reproductive rights, and regulation of family status. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 104N. Race and Law (4)
Has the law helped end or contributed to racism in the United States? This course will explore the law of Slavery, Segregation, and Immigration, and study Equal Protection, Affirmative Action, and Criminal Justice (including hate crimes and First Amendment implications).

POLI 104P. Science, Technology, and the Law (4)
Science advances exponentially. The law is slower to follow. This course examines legal issues created by today’s scientific breakthroughs and explores what future legal challenges might await tomorrow’s scientific discoveries, from privacy on the internet to the meaning of life. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 104T. Survey in Evidence, Civil Procedure, and Criminal Law (4)
This course offers a survey of criminal law, civil procedure, and evidence law. The course will use a text with both a civil case file and a criminal case file, where students will be assigned to be the state/plaintiff in one matter and the defendant in the other. Each class will have students arguing as if they were in the courtroom setting to teach the rules of civil procedure, rules of evidence, and criminal law. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and POLI 104J.

POLI 105A. Latino Politics in the U.S. (4)
This course examines contemporary issues in Latino politics in the U.S.; comparisons of racial and ethnic group experiences in the U.S.; Latino access to the political system through political participation. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 108. Politics of Multiculturalism (4)
This course will examine central issues in debates about race, ethnicity, and multiculturalism in the United States. It will look at relations not only between whites and minorities, but also at those among racial and ethnic communities. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 110A. Citizens and Saints: Political Thought from Plato to Augustine (4)
This course focuses on the development of politics and political thought in ancient Greece, its evolution through Rome and the rise of Christianity. Readings from Plato, Aristotle, Augustine, Machiavelli, and others.

POLI 110B. Sovereigns, Subjects, and the Modern State: Political Thought from Machiavelli to Rousseau (4)
The course deals with the period that marks the rise and triumph of the modern state. Central topics include the gradual emergence of human rights and the belief in individual autonomy. Readings from Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, and others.

POLI 110C. Revolution and Reaction: Political Thought from Kant to Nietzsche (4)
The course deals with the period that marks the triumph and critique of the modern state. Central topics include the development of the idea of class, of the irrational, of the unconscious, and of rationalized authority as they affect politics. Readings drawn from Rousseau, Kant, Hegel, Marx, Nietzsche, and others.

POLI 110DA. Freedom and Discipline: Political Thought in the Twentieth Century (4)
This course addresses certain problems that are characteristic of the political experience of the twentieth century. Topics considered are revolution, availability of tradition, and the problems of the rationalization of social and political relations. Readings from Nietzsche, Weber, Freud, Lenin, Gramsci, Dewey, Oakeshott, Arendt, Merleau-Ponty.

POLI 110EA. American Political Thought from Revolution to Civil War (4)
The first quarter examines the origins and development of American political thought from the revolutionary period to the end of the nineteenth century with special emphasis on the formative role of eighteenth-century liberalism and the tensions between “progressive” and “conservative” wings of the liberal consensus.

POLI 110EB. American Political Thought from Civil War to Civil Rights (4)
The second quarter examines some of the major themes of American political thought in the twentieth century including controversies over the meaning of democracy, equality, and distributive justice, the nature of “neoconservatism,” and America’s role as a world power.

POLI 110EC. American Political Thought: Contemporary Debates (4)
This course explores contemporary issues in American political thought. Topics may include liberalism and rights, gender and sexuality, race and ethnicity, cultural diversity, and the boundaries of modern citizenship. Readings include political pamphlets, philosophical treatises, court decisions, and works of literature.

POLI 110ED. Seminar in American Political Thought (4)
This seminar explores debates over ideals, institutions, and identities in American political thought. Themes and topics will vary. Readings will include political pamphlets, philosophical treatises, court decisions, and works of literature. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; department stamp.

POLI 110G. International Political Thought (4)
This course explores theories of politics that are oriented beyond state borders. Key topics include international order, cosmopolitanism, human rights, just war, global justice, mitigation, citizenship, identity, and commercial society. The course examines thinkers from classical antiquity to contemporary times.

POLI 110H. Democracy and Its Critics (4)
This course will examine the historical development of the ideal of democracy from Periclean Athens to the present in the light of criticism by such thinkers as Plato, Tocqueville, and Mosca and difficulties encountered in efforts to realize the ideal.

POLI 110J. Power in American Society (4)
This course examines how power has been conceived and contested during the course of American history. The course explores the changes that have occurred in political rhetoric and strategies as America has moved from a relatively isolated agrarian and commercial republic to a military and industrial empire.

POLI 110K. Liberty and Equality (4)
Leading political theories of liberal democracy since 1950. What is the meaning of political liberty? Political equality is the equality of what? Course will consider thinkers such as J.S. Mill, Berlin, Rawls, Dworkin, Taylor, Sen, Nussbaum, G. Cohen, Petit. 

POLI 110M. Green Political Thought (4)
Leading theories of environmental justice, ethics, and politics since 1960. Thinkers such as Dauvergne, Dobson, Dryzek, Eckersley, Latour, Plumwood, and Simon on ecosystems, climate change, sustainability, preservation, human welfare, nonhuman animals, place, feminism, state, market, and green political movements. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 110N. Theories of Nationalism (4)
Nationalist ideologies. Examination of the rhetoric of nationalist mobilization. Theories about the relationship between nationalist movements and democracy, capitalism, warfare, and the state. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 110T. Modern Political Ideologies (4)
An examination of some of the ideas and values associated with major social and political movements in Europe and the United States since the French Revolution. Topics will vary and may include liberalism, populism, democracy, communism, nationalism, fascism, and feminism.

POLI 111B. Global Justice in Theory and Action (4)
Discuss the idea of justice from multiple perspectives: theory, philosophy, institutions, markets, social mobilization, politics, and environment. Examine the assets and capabilities of diverse justice-seeking organizations and movements aimed at improving quality of life and place locally, regionally, and globally.

POLI 111D. Changing Harmful Social Norms (4)
Study of types of social norms and practices, and how to change them. Illustrated with development examples such as the end of footbinding, female genital cutting, urban violence in Colombia, Serbian student revolution, early marriage, and other adverse gender norms.

POLI 112A. Economic Theories of Political Behavior (4)
An introduction to theories of political behavior developed with the assumptions and methods of economics. General emphasis will be upon theories linking individual behavior to institutional patterns. Specific topics to be covered will include collective action, leadership, voting, and bargaining.

POLI 112C. Political Theory and Artistic Vision (4)
The course explores the modes of political thinking found in arts, especially in drama and literature. It may include ends and means, political leadership, and political economy. Students may not receive credit for both POLI 112CS and POLI 112C. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 113A. East Asian Thought in Comparative Perspective (4)
This course examines the major traditions of East Asian thought in comparative perspective. Topics include Confucianism, Taoism, Buddhism, and contemporary nationalist and East Asian political thought. Throughout, focused comparisons and contrasts will be made between western and eastern thought. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 113B. Chinese and Japanese Political Thought I (4)
Examines philosophical traditions of ancient and modern China and Japan, to understand how these have been reflected in Chinese and Japanese development. Course will be in English; however, students with Chinese or Japanese language skills will have opportunity to use these. Graduate students will be required to complete a seminar-length research paper; undergraduate students will write a paper. Prerequisites: upper-division standing for POLI 113B.

POLI 113C. Chinese and Japanese Political Thought II (4)
A continuation of 113B, which follows political philosophical themes in China and Japan through the twentieth century. Important topics include Buddhism and Confucianism as they changed in each context in response to internal and external stimuli. Prerequisites: POLI 113B.

POLI 114B. Marxist Political Thought (4)
An introduction to Marxist thought from its roots in the Western tradition through its development in non-Western contexts. Emphasis is placed on how adaptations were made in Marxism to accommodate the specific challenges of each environment.

POLI 115A. Gender and Politics (4)
Our understanding of politics, power, conflict, and quality continue to be challenged and transformed by considering gender as it intersects with nationality, race, class, and ethnicity. We will consider the importance of gender in each of the subfields of political science.

POLI 116A. Feminist Theory (4)
Readings in historical and contemporary feminist theory; development of gender as a category of political analysis; alternative perspectives on core concepts and categories in feminist thought. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 117. Bending the Curve: Solutions to Climate Change (4)
(Same as SIO 109.) Climate change is an urgent global problem affecting the lives of hundreds of millions of people, now and for the foreseeable future. This course will empower students to confront climate change as critical actors to innovate creative cross-disciplinary solutions. Students may not receive credit for POLI 117 and SIO 109. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 117R. Bending the Curve (Online): Solutions to Climate Change (4)
(Cross-listed with SIO 109R.) This online course focuses on developing urgent climate change solutions that integrate technology, policy and governance, finance, land use, and social/educational dimensions. Students may only receive credit for one of the following: POLI 117, POLI 117R, SIO 109, or SIO 109R. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 118. Game Theory in Political Science (4)
This course introduces students to game theory and its uses in political science. Topics covered include the concepts of Nash equilibrium, dominant strategies, subgame perfection and backwards induction, and the applications of those concepts to the study of voting, electoral competition, public goods provision, legislatures, and collective action. An emphasis is placed on developing students’ analytical reasoning and problem-solving skills through weekly problem sets and in-class exercises. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 118B. The Political Theory of Liberation Theology (4)
A comparative study of liberation theologies, including continental, Latin American, South African, and East Asian. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and POLI 13 or POLI 13D.

POLI 119A. Special Topics in Political Theory (4)
An undergraduate course designed to cover various aspects of political theory. May be repeated for credit two times, provided each course is a separate topic, for a maximum of twelve units.

POLI 120A. Political Development of Western Europe (4)
An examination of various paths of European political development through consideration of the conflicts that shaped these political systems: the commercialization of agriculture; religion and the role of the church; the army and the state bureaucracy; and industrialization. Stress will be on alternative paradigms and on theorists.

POLI 120B. The German Political System (4)
An analysis of the political system of the Federal Republic of Germany with an emphasis on the party system, elections, executive-legislative relations, and federalism. Comparisons will be made with other West European democracies and the Weimar Republic.

POLI 120C. Politics in France (4)
This course will examine the consequences of social and economic change in France. Specific topics will include institutional development under a semi-presidential system, parties, and elections.

POLI 120D. Germany: Before, During, and After Division (4)
Consideration of political, economic, and security factors that have kept Germany at the center of European developments for more than a century.

POLI 120E. Scandinavian Politics (4)
Introduction to the politics and societies of the Scandinavian states (Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden). Focuses on historical development, political culture, constitutional arrangements, political institutions, parties and interest groups, the Scandinavian welfare states, and foreign policy. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 120F. Europe as a Political Model (4)
Political debates often invoke the “European model,” with the left extolling its political virtues as the right derides it as “unworkable.” Although these discussions frequently tie into political reform debates, they offer little discussion of what the “European political model” entails. This course is designed to identify the economic, institutional, and cultural components of the “European political model,” examining whether it provides insights for reform outside of the European context.

POLI 120G. British Politics (4)
Emphasis will be placed on the interaction between British political institutions and processes and contemporary policy problems: the economy, social policy, foreign affairs. The course assumes no prior knowledge of British politics and comparisons with the United States will be drawn.

POLI 120H. European Integration (4)
This course reviews the origins and development of the European Community/European Union and its institutions, theories of integration and the challenges inherent in the creation of a supranational political regime.

POLI 120I. Politics in Italy (4)
This course will provide a comparative perspective on the development and functioning of the Italian political system. It includes analysis of political institutions, ideological traditions, parties and elections, political elites in the policy process, and the evolving importance of Italy within European integration.

POLI 120J. Politics and Revolution I: The Politics of the French Revolution (4)
(Coscheduled with POLI 220J.) A comparative historical study of the origins, dynamics, and outcomes of the French Revolution. After overview of social-scientific theories and approaches to understanding revolution, the course will evaluate these in light of the concrete experience of the events that gave birth to the term revolution itself. Only undergraduates will have a final examination; graduate students will be required to do additional reading for the course as well as complete a seminar-length research paper. Prerequisites: for POLI 120J, one lower-division political science course; for POLI 220J, graduate standing.

POLI 120K. Comparative Legislatures (4)
This course examines how legislatures shape policy-making in the United States, France, and United Kingdom. We will pay particular attention to how political parties, institutional structures, and legislator incentives impact representation and policy-making within and across cases. A substantial portion of the course will require participation in a simulation which will ask students to apply theoretical insights learned in the course to advance legislation in a simulated legislature.

POLI 120N. Contention and Conflict in Africa (4)
This course offers a systematic study of civil wars, electoral violence, anti-immigrant violence, genocides, coups, riots, and rebel groups in sub-Saharan Africa. It will explore why some regions experience certain types of violence and others do not.

POLI 120P. Africa’s Success Stories (4)
This course examines reasons why we can be cautiously optimistic about development, growth, peace and democratization in Africa. Sample cases include Botswana’s resource blessing, postconflict reconstruction in Uganda, and democratization in Ghana, Benin, and Niger.

POLI 120Q. Ethnic Politics (4)
This course introduces students to the comparative study of ethnic politics. It examines the relationships between ethnicity on one hand, and mobilization, political contestation, violence, trust, and pork on the other. It draws from analysis from a variety of contexts and regions, such as sub-Saharan Africa, Eastern Europe, North America, South Asia, and Western Europe. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 121. Government and Politics of the Middle East (4)
This course examines general themes affecting the region (social structure and regime type, religion and modernization, bonds and tensions), the character of major states, and efforts to resolve the conflict between Israel and its Arab and Islamic neighbors. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 121B. Politics in Israel (4)
An interdisciplinary study of Israel as both a unique and yet a common example of a modern democratic nation-state. We will examine Israel’s history, its political, economic, and legal systems, social structure and multicultural tensions, the relation between state and religion, national security, and international relations.

POLI 122. Politics of Human Rights (4)
What do we mean by “international human rights”? Are they universal? This course examines human rights abuse and redress over time, and across different regions of the world. From this empirically grounded perspective, we critically evaluate contemporary human rights debates. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 122D. Abuse of Power (4)
Power, a crucial part of politics, can be, and often is, abused. This course discusses the nature of power and surveys a variety of abuses, including agenda manipulation, rent extraction, fraud, extortion, corruption, exploitation, and gross political oppression. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 123. Politics of Empire in Comparative Perspective (4)
In between “rises” and “declines,” empires are political entities with highly heterogeneous populations that must be governed. The course examines the similarities and differences in imperial governance, comparing the internal and external political dynamics of traditional (Roman, Ottoman), modernizing (Habsburg), and modern (British) empires. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 124. Israeli-Palestinian Conflict (4)
(Same as SOCI 188I.) In this course, we will examine the national and colonial dimensions of this long-lasting conflict and then turn our attention to the legal, governmental/political, and everyday aspects of the Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza following the 1967 war.

POLI 124A. Political Consequences of Electoral Systems (4)
A comparative survey of the major dimensions of the electoral systems used in contemporary democracies (including plurality and majority systems, proportional representation, and districting methods) and of their effects on party competition.

POLI 125. Gender, Politics, and Globalization (4)
What have been the effects of globalization on gender, and how has gender shaped conceptions and processes of globalization? Through case studies drawn from the global north and south, this course critically assesses contemporary theoretical debates on global gender justice.

POLI 125A. Communities and the Environment (4)
A popular new idea in environmental protection is to include local communities in conservation efforts. But what are these communities? What challenges do they face in governing their own resources? This course uses both theory and case studies to explore the political economy of community-based conservations.

POLI 125B. The Politics of Food in a Global Economy (4)
This course explores emerging issues in production and consumption of food in a global economy. On production side, we discuss issues such as famine, overproduction of commercial crops, and sustainability. On consumption side, we explore issues such as fair trade, ethical consumption, and public health consequences (such as obesity). Then we discuss the roles of governments, international organizations, and communities to address these issues.

POLI 125D. Corruption in Developing Countries (4)
This course explores corruption in developing countries. It examines various types of corruption in areas including health care, elections, natural resources, development projects, and international business. The course investigates causes and consequences of corruption, with an emphasis on political and economic factors. It also explores successes and failures of anti-corruption policies enacted by domestic and international actors. The course draws on examples from Africa, Asia, and Latin America.

POLI 125E. The Politics of Conservation in Developing Countries (4)
Conservation in developing countries concerns resources that are extremely important to policymakers, militaries, environmental organizations, communities, and individuals. This course examines these groups' struggle for control over wildlife and forests—from the capital to the village—on several continents. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 126. Political Economy of Development (4)
Why are some countries rich and others poor? This course examines how political and economic factors shape development trajectories, focusing on Africa, Asia, and Latin America. Topics include the impact of democracy, corruption, oil, and foreign aid on economic development. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 126AA. Fundamentals of Political Economy: Modern Capitalism (4)
This course explores how economic factors affect political institutions and how political action affects economic behavior in the United States and Western Europe. Particular attention is given to relations between business and labor, economic policy choices, and the impact of international trade. Prerequisites: POLI 11 or consent of instructor.

POLI 126AB. Politics and Economics in Eastern Europe (4)
This course explores the interrelationship of politics and economics in Eastern Europe, analyzing the historic evolution of the area, the socialist period, and contemporary political and economic change there. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 127. Politics of Developing Countries (4)
This course critically examines central concepts and theories of development, and assesses their utility in understanding political, economic, and social change in the developing world. Central case studies are drawn from three regions: Latin America, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Southeast Asia. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 128. Autocracy, Democracy, and Prosperity (4)
This course considers the interplay between factor endowments, political institutions, and economic performance. It focuses on the connection between representative political institutions and the emergence and expansion of markets.

POLI 129. How to Steal an Election (4)
Examine the role of elections in new and fragile democracies, explore how politicians construct elections to suppress increased levels of democracy, the techniques used to undermine free and fair elections, and the strategic responses to these actions by domestic/international actors. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 130. Politics of Violence (4)
This course examines why some people, places, and times experience more violence than others. Drawing on anthropology, psychology, and political science, we focus on the role that institutions and inequality play in shaping how people experience and engage in violence.

POLI 130AA. The Soviet Successor States (4)
An overview of the historical background and contemporary politics of the fifteen successor states of the Soviet Union.

POLI 130AD. The Politics of the Russian Revolution (4)
An examination of the dynamics of the Russian Revolution from 1905 through the Stalinist period and recent years in light of theories of revolutionary change. Emphasis is placed on the significance of political thought, socioeconomic stratification, and cultural-historical conditions.

POLI 130B. Politics in the People’s Republic of China (4)
This course analyzes the political system of China since 1949, including political institutions, the policy-making process, and the relationship between politics and economics. The main focus is on the post-Mao era of reform beginning in 1978.

POLI 130G. Politics of Modern India (4)
The course gives an overview of Indian politics since 1947. It addresses the following: (1) To what extent is India a full-fledged democracy in which all citizens enjoy political equality? (2) Why has political violence occurred in some parts of India, and at certain times, but not others? (3) How well have the country’s institutions fared in alleviating poverty? Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 131. Muslim Integration and Exclusion (4)
Is there a Muslim challenge to immigrant integration in Christian-heritage societies? This course asks if and why Muslim immigrants integrate into their host societies, and evaluates the various solutions put forth by politicians and scholars.

POLI 131C. The Chinese Revolution (4)
An analysis of the dynamics of the Chinese Revolution from the fall of the Qing Dynasty (1644–1911) to the present. Emphasis is placed on the relationship between political thought and the dynamics of the revolutionary process.

POLI 132. Political Development and Modern China (4)
Political development has dominated the study of comparative politics among US academicians since the revival of the Cold War in 1947. This course examines critically this paradigm and its Western philosophical roots in the context of the experience of modern China.
POLI 133. Democracy, Development, and Conflict in South Asia (4)
This class introduces core topics in the study of South Asian politics. It uses evidence from India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka to shed light on key questions in the study of comparative politics. We examine (a) why these nations’ regime trajectories have diverged; (b) violent civil conflict, as well as nuclear weapons’ contribution to regional stability; and (c) human and economic development, including corruption, caste, gender, poverty alleviation, liberalization, and growth.

POLI 133A. Japanese Politics: A Developmental Perspective (4)
This course will analyze the political systems of modern Japan in comparative-historical perspective.

POLI 133D. Political Institutions of East Asian Countries (4)
This course discusses the following major topics in three East Asian countries (Japan, South Korea, and the Philippines) from a comparative perspective: (a) economic and political development; (b) political institutions; and (c) policies.

POLI 133G. Postwar US-Japan Relations (4)
The relationship between the United States and Japan has been described as “the most important in the world, bar none.” This course will examine US-Japan security and economic relations in the postwar period from the Occupation and Cold War alliance through the severe bilateral trade friction of the 1980s and 1990s to the present relationship and how it is being transformed by the forces of globalization, regionalization, and multilateralism.

POLI 133J. Korean Politics (4)
This course is primarily about the politics and political economy of South Korea, but will also briefly look at politics and political economy of North Korea as well as foreign and unification policies of the two Koreas. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 134. Political Parties/Development (4)
Political parties are fundamental to almost every democratic regime, and many authoritarian ones too. This class examines their role in developing countries. Where do parties come from? What part do they play in nationalist liberation struggles? How do they win support? Do extremist parties stoke ethnic violence? Can stable party systems boost economic growth? The class canvasses key political science theories and draws on both quantitative and case-study evidence from across the Global South.

POLI 134AA. Comparative Politics of Latin America (4)
Comparative analysis of contemporary political systems and developmental profiles of selected Latin American countries, with special reference to the ways in which revolutionary and counter-revolutionary movements have affected the political, economic, and social structures observable in these countries today. Analyzes the performance of “revolutionary” governments in dealing with problems of domestic political management, reducing external economic dependency, redistributing wealth, creating employment, and extending social services. Introduction to general theoretical works on Latin American politics and development. Prerequisites: POLI 11 or consent of instructor.

POLI 134B. Politics in Mexico (4)
General survey of the Mexican political system as it operates today. Emphasis on factors promoting the breakdown of Mexico’s authoritarian regime and the transition to a more democratic political system. Changing relationship between the state and various segments of Mexico society (economic elites, peasants, urban labor, and the Church). New patterns of civil-military relations.

POLI 134D. Selected Topics in Latin American Politics (4)
A comparative analysis of contemporary political issues in Latin America. Material to be drawn from two or three countries. Among the topics: development, nationalism, neoimperialism, political change. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 134I. Politics in the Southern Cone of Latin America (4)
This course is a comparative analysis of twentieth-century political developments and issues in the southern cone of Latin America: Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay. The course will also examine the social and economic content and results of contrasting political experiments. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 134J. Cuba: Revolution and Reform (4)
Students will study the origins and direction of the Cuban revolution and the actions and personality of Castro. Additional topics will include the Cuban economy today, Cuban political organizations and public opinion, important social issues including health care and public education, and Cuban foreign policy and relations between the U.S. and Cuba. The class will instruct students on Cuban contemporary social media and conclude with an examination of alternative scenarios for Cuba’s future. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 135. Comparative LGBT Politics (4)
This course is designed to expose students to the study of LGBT politics, focusing specifically on the formation of LGBT movements, the presence (or absence) of political opportunities to advance their desired goals, as well as their political success (or lack thereof). Although the course will initially examine the US LGBT movement, the course will also examine the formation (and political success/failure) of LGBT movements in other democratic political systems. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 136. Religion and Politics (4)
The political impact of major religious traditions—including Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, and Confucianism—around the world. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 136A. Nationalism and Politics (4)
An examination of nationalist politics as practiced by opposition movements and governments in power. Appropriate case studies from around the world will be selected. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 137. A Sports Analytics Approach to the Social Sciences (4)
Sports analytics is a fast-growing field. It uses data and statistical methods to measure performance in competitive sports. The approach’s popularity has generated a wealth of data that can be used to shed light on social science questions in interesting ways. We will focus on topics such as violent behavior, discrimination, cultural/ethnic diversity, corruption, and cognitive biases using examples from baseball, basketball, figure skating, football, hockey, soccer, and sumo wrestling. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 137A. Comparative Political Parties and Interest Groups (4)
This course serves as an introduction to the comparative study of political parties and interest groups as well as an analytical introduction to parties, interest groups, and their role in democratic representation. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 138D. Special Topics in Comparative Politics (4)
An undergraduate course designed to cover various aspects of comparative politics. May be repeated for credit three times, provided each course is a separate topic, for a maximum of twelve units.

POLI 140A. International Law (4)
International law is central to the efforts to create a world order to limit armed conflict, regulate world economy, and set minimum standards for human rights. This course introduces international law and explains theories advanced by academic analysts and practitioners to explain its role. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 140B. Concepts and Aspects of Revolution (4)
Introduction to the analytical and comparative study of revolutionary movements and related forms of political violence. Topics include the classical paradigm, types of revolutionary episodes, psychological theories, ideology and belief systems, coups, insurgencies, civil wars, and terrorism and revolutionary outcomes. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 140C. International Crisis Diplomacy (4)
A survey of international peacekeeping and peace enforcement in civil conflicts with a simulation of international diplomacy. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 140D. International Human Rights Law: Migrant Populations (4)
International migration creates a distinct set of human rights challenges. This course examines the conflict between international legal obligations and domestic politics of citizenship, human rights, asylum, and human trafficking. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 142A. United States Foreign Policy (4)
United States foreign policy from the colonial period to the present era. Systematic analysis of competing explanations for US policies—strategic interests, economic requirements, or the vicissitudes of domestic politics. Interaction between the U.S., foreign states (particularly allies), and transnational actors are examined. Prerequisites: POLI 12 or consent of instructor.

POLI 142D. Weapons of Mass Destruction (4)
This course provides an overview of the challenges posed by chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear weapons. Students will learn about how these weapons work, why states seek them, and attempts to prevent proliferation. We will delve into technical and policy challenges related to these weapons, and address how CBRN weapons shape national and regional security dynamics. Efforts to restrict the proliferation of these weapons will be discussed. We will also analyze CBRN terrorism.

POLI 142I. National and International Security (4)
A survey of theories of defense policies and international security.

POLI 142J. National Security Strategy (4)
A survey of American strategies for national defense. Topics may include deterrence, coercive diplomacy, limited war, and unconventional warfare.

POLI 142K. Politics and Warfare (4)
This course offers an exploration of general theories of the origins of warfare; the impact of the state on war in the modern world; and the microfoundations of combat and compliance in the context of the costs of war and military mobilization. The course should be of special interest to students in international relations and comparative politics.

POLI 142L. Insurgency and Terrorism (4)
“Terrorism” uses “illegitimate” violence to achieve political goals. This course uses philosophical, historical, and contemporary material from distinct cultures to understand which actions are defined as “terrorist,” who uses them, why, and when, as well as the determinants of their effectiveness.

POLI 142M. US Foreign Policy/Regional Security (4)
Lectures and readings examine US foreign policy in Europe, Latin America, and East Asia with attention to current problems with specific nations (e.g., Bosnia) and issues (e.g., terrorism). This course integrates historical, comparative, and foreign perspectives on regional security dynamics.

POLI 142N. American Defense Policy (4)
An introduction to analytic techniques for assessing policy options in the field of national security. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 142O. International Terrorism (4)
(Same as SOCI 177.) This course covers the definitions, history, and internationalization of terrorism; the interrelation of religion, politics, and terror; and the representation of terrorism in the media. A number of organizations and their activities in Europe and the Middle East are examined. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 142P. Crisis Areas in World Politics (4)
This course examines the most critical areas in contemporary world politics. While the emphasis will be placed on American involvement in each crisis, an effort will be made to acquaint the student with its historical and political background. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 142Q. Cold War (4)
This course explores the way in which the international rivalry between the Soviet Union and the United States affected relationships between the two powers, their allies, the Third World, and above all, their internal domestic affairs and development.

POLI 143. New Modes of International Conflict: Cyber, Space, and Robots (4)
New technologies are transforming the nature of competition and conflict in international relations. Drones allow nations to engage in “bloodless” warfare though the weak and vulnerable continue to be targeted. Cyber space blurs the lines on maps and between civilian and military. New strategies are developing to enact and resist new modes of warfare. This course equips students to better understand and operate in this brave new technological world and to interpret politics in the twenty-first century.

POLI 143A. War and Society (4)
How has warfighting evolved over the centuries? How has it varied across cultures? What has war been like for soldiers and civilians? How do societies mobilize for war, and how do they change in the short and long term from fighting? Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 144. International Political Economy (4)
This course serves as an introduction to the study of international political economy. We will examine the evolution of international economic relations in trade, finance, and economic development and discuss different explanations for its likely causes and consequences. 

POLI 144AB. Selected Topics in International Political Economy (4)
This course will consider major theories purporting to explain and predict the workings of the international order from the point of view of political economy. An extended discussion of one aspect of the economic order (e.g., the multinational corporation) will serve as the test case. One quarter of economics recommended. Prerequisites: POLI 12.

POLI 144D. International Political Economy: Money and Finance (4)
Examination of effects of national policies and international collaboration on public and private international financial institutions, in particular the management of international debt crises, economic policy coordination, and the role of international lender of last resort.

POLI 144E. The Politics of International Trade (4)
Examines theories of trade and protectionism, focusing both on relations among advanced industrial nations and on relations between developed and developing countries. Topics include standard and strategic trade theory, nontariff barriers to trade, export-led growth strategies, regional trade agreements, and the future of the WTO.

POLI 144F. The Politics of International Trade and Finance (4)
Examines the welfare and distributional aspects of international trade and finance as they relate to the politics of economic policy making. Topics include globalization in historical perspective; origins and consequences of trade policy; exchange-rate arrangements; international capital flows; currency crises; economic development.

POLI 145A. International Politics and Drugs (4)
This course examines the domestic and international aspects of the drug trade. It will investigate the drug issues from the perspectives of consumers, producers, traffickers, money launderers, and law enforcement. Course material covers the experience of the United States, Latin America, Turkey, Southeast Asia, Western Europe, and Japan.

POLI 145C. International Relations After the Cold War: Theory and Prospect (4)
The nature of international politics appears to have changed dramatically since 1989. This course applies different theoretical approaches to enhance our understanding of the new international environment, future prospects for peace and war, and current problems of foreign policy. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 146A. The U.S. and Latin America: Political and Economic Relations (4)
An analytical survey of US relations with Latin America from the 1820s to the present, with particular emphasis on the post–Cold War environment. Topics include free trade and economic integration; drugs and drug trafficking; illegal migration and immigration control. Focus covers US policy, Latin American reactions, dynamics of cooperation, and options for the future.

POLI 147B. Russian-American Relations (4)
A historical and topical survey of major issues in Russian-American relations, such as security arrangements in the post-Soviet space, the war on terrorism, arms control and nonproliferation, and international energy.

POLI 149. Spies, Intelligence, and US National Security (4)
Information is the key to success and failure in US foreign policy. This course will cover the American intelligence community’s secret and information gathering processes. The curriculum is organized by the specialist functions of real-world IC professionals. You will learn methods for collecting raw data, including human and signals intelligence, how that data is synthesized into intelligence, the different reporting formats that drive national security decisions, and about oversight and ethical issues.

POLI 150A. Politics of Immigration (4)
Comparative analysis of attempts by the United States and other industrialized countries to initiate, regulate and reduce immigration from Third World countries. Social and economic factors shaping outcomes of immigration policies, public opinion toward immigrants, anti-immigration movements, and immigration policy reform options in industrialized countries. Prerequisites: upper-division standing required.

POLI 151. International Organizations (4)
Surveys the theory and function of IOs (UN, NATO, EU, World Bank, IMF) in promoting international cooperation in security, peacekeeping, trade, environment, and human rights. We discuss why IOs exist, how they work, and what challenges they face. Prerequisites: POLI 12, upper-division standing.

POLI 152. Gender in International Conflict (4)
This course focuses on women’s attitudes about and participation in political conflict, including the recruitment, execution, and resolution of intra- and interstate conflicts, terrorism, and protest. We explore the types of gender-based violence women face (e.g., violence against female politicians, sexual violence, and conflict-induced interpersonal violence), as well as their experiences with reintegration, reconciliation, transitional justice, and peace-building initiatives.

POLI 153. The European Union in World Politics (4)
This course introduces students to the role of the EU as a foreign policy actor. Topics include the development of the EU’s trade policy, foreign aid policy, security policy, as well as case studies of EU foreign policy.

POLI 154. Special Topics in International Relations (4)
An undergraduate course designed to cover various aspects of international relations. May be repeated for credit two times, provided each course is a separate topic, for a maximum of twelve units.

POLI 160AA. Introduction to Policy Analysis (4)
(Same as USP 101) This course will explore the process by which the preferences of individuals are converted into public policy. Also included will be an examination of the complexity of policy problems, methods for designing better policies, and a review of tools used by analysts and policy makers. Prerequisites: POLI 10 or 11.

POLI 160AB. Introduction to Policy Analysis (4)
In this course, students will use their knowledge of the political and economic foundations of public policy making to conduct research in a wide variety of public policy problems. Prerequisites: POLI 160AA.

POLI 161. Research Design for Social Science (4)
This course will introduce students to core strategies for designing and evaluating social science research. Students will learn about construct, internal, and external validity and how to improve them in social science research, with a particular focus on experimental designs. Students will develop their own designs as well as study designs in published social science research. Prerequisites: POLI/ECON 5(D) and POLI 30(D).

POLI 162. Environmental Policy (4)
This course will explore contemporary environmental issues such as global warming, endangered species, and land use. Students will be asked to analyze various policy options and to write case analyses. Policies may be debated in class.

POLI 163. Analyzing Politics (4)
Politics are understood as the combination of individual preferences and decisions into collective choices. What are the issues involved in aggregating individual preferences, what is the choice of rules—formal and informal—for doing so.

POLI 164. The Politics of Public Policy (4)
How do politics determine policy? In this course, students will be introduced to the skill of conducting a cost-benefit analysis, and then will discuss how political ideas, interests, and institutions often move policy outcomes away from those based on cost-benefit analysis.

POLI 165. Special Topic: Policy Analysis (4)
An undergraduate course designed to cover various aspects of policy analysis. May be repeated for credit two times, provided each course is a separate topic, for a maximum of twelve units.

POLI 168. Policy Assessment (4)
The use of real data to assess policy alternatives. Introduction to benefit/cost analysis, decision theory, and the valuation of public goods. Applications to health, environmental, and regulatory economic policy making.

POLI 170. Algorithms, Public Policy, and Ethics (4)
The deployment of predictive algorithms for public policy optimization has increased in recent years across a variety of domains. This course will introduce key concepts, considerations, and concerns relating to algorithmic decision-making in policy processes. This includes understanding how data are used to make predictions, how predictions can be used to aid decision-making, the conditions under which these practices will be effective, and the important ethical dimensions of these practices. Prerequisites: POLI 5, POLI 5D, or ECON 5.

POLI 170A. Applied Data Analysis for Political Science (4)
This course is an advanced introductory course for undergraduates. It will acquaint students with statistical methodology as it is used in the social sciences. It is assumed that the student has the mathematical background to progress through the materials a bit faster than in a true introductory course. Prerequisites: POLI 30 or POLI 30D or consent of instructor.

POLI 171. Making Policy with Data (4)
This class explores how we can make policy recommendations using data. We attempt to establish causal relationships between policy intervention and outcomes based on statistical evidence. Hands-on examples will be provided throughout the course. Prerequisites: POLI 5 or 5D or ECON 5 and POLI 30 or 30D.

POLI 172. Advanced Social Data Analytics (4)
An accelerated course in computer programming and data analytics for collecting, analyzing, and understanding data in the social world. Students engage in hands-on learning with applied social science problems, developing statistical and computational skills for sophisticated data manipulation, analysis, visualization. Prerequisites: POLI 5 or 5D or ECON 5 and POLI 30 or 30D.

POLI 173. Social Network Analysis (4)
This class introduces tools for analyzing social networks including graph visualization, egocentric and sociocentric network measures, network simulation, and data management. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 174. Analyzing Elections (4)
This course is concerned with the political economy of elections. It will analyze key topics in political science using both theoretical and empirical tools. Specific topics covered include party and candidate strategy, electoral campaigns, the role and origins of parties, electoral accountability, and voter behavior. Prerequisites: POLI 112A or POLI 118.

POLI 175. Machine Learning for Social Scientists (4)
This course focuses on statistical and algorithmic techniques to analyze and utilize large collections of data for social science inferences. The goal of the course is to introduce students to modern machine learning methods and provide the skills necessary to apply the methods widely. In achieving this goal, students will learn about core concepts in machine learning and statistics, developing skills that are transferable to other types of data and inference problems. Prerequisites: POLI 170A or POLI 171 or POLI 172 or CCS 1.

POLI 176. Text as Data (4)
(Cross-listed with DSC 161.) This class explores statistical and computational methods to enable students to use text as a data source in the social sciences. Hands-on examples will equip students to work with text data in final projects. Prerequisites: POLI/ECON 5D or POLI 30D or POLI 170A or POLI 171 or POLI 172.

POLI 179. Special Topics in Political Science Methodology (4)
Special topics course in quantitative methods for political science and broader social sciences. May be taken for credit up to three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

POLI 191A–B. Senior Honors Seminar: Frontiers of Political Science (4-4)
This course is open only to seniors interested in qualifying for departmental honors. Admission to the course will be determined by the department. Each student will write an honors essay under the supervision of a member of the faculty.

POLI 192. Senior Seminar in Political Science (1)
The Senior Seminar is designed to allow senior undergraduates to meet with faculty members in a small group setting to explore an intellectual topic in political science at the upper-division level. Topics will vary from quarter to quarter. Senior Seminars may be taken for credit up to four times, with a change in topic and permission of the department. Enrollment is limited to twenty students, with preference given to seniors. Prerequisites: department stamp and/or consent of instructor.

POLI 194. Research Seminar in Washington, DC (4)
(Same as COMM 194, USP 194, HITO 193, SOCI 194, COGS 194) Course attached to six-unit internship taken by students participating in the UCDC Program. Involves weekly seminar meetings with faculty and teaching assistant and a substantial research paper. Prerequisites: participating in UCDC Program.

POLI 194RA. Research Apprenticeship Seminar (4)
Preparation of a major paper from research conducted while participating in the Research Apprenticeship (POLI 198RA). Presentations to and participation in weekly seminar meetings also required. Students can enroll in POLI 194RA only if they have previously taken or are simultaneously enrolled in 198RA. Prerequisites: department approval. Students must apply for the Research Apprenticeship program and be approved to enroll. Participants must be majors in political science with junior or senior standing and a GPA of 3.5 or higher in all political science courses taken at UC San Diego. Individual projects may require other prerequisite training, such as POLI 30.

POLI 194SD. Local Internship Research Seminar (4)
The Local Internship Research Seminar will be paired with a Local Internship in Political Science (POLI 197SD) in the same quarter. The linkage to this research seminar will provide advanced academic training in analytic skills appropriate to the internship experience and requires a substantial paper based on original research. Prerequisites: department approval and consent of instructor. Corequisites: POLI 197SD.

POLI 195. Apprentice Teaching (4)
Teaching and tutorial activities associated with courses and seminars. Limited to advanced political science majors with at least a 3.5 GPA in upper-division political science courses. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit two times, but only four units may be used for major credit. Prerequisites: department approval.

POLI 197I. Political Science Washington Internship (6, 8)
This internship is attached to the UCDC Program. Students participating in the UCDC Program are placed in an internship in the Washington, DC, area requiring approximately seventeen to twenty-three hours per week. Prerequisites: must be enrolled in the UCDC Program; department stamp required.

POLI 197SD. Local Internship in Political Science (4)
Individual placements for field learning integrated with political science. A written contract involving all parties with learning objectives, a project outline, and a means of supervision and progress evaluation must be filed with the faculty adviser and department undergraduate coordinator prior to the beginning of the internship. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: ninety units completed; 2.5 minimum cumulative GPA overall and 3.0 in political science; POLI 30 and at least two upper-division courses in political science. Department approval and consent of instructor. Corequisites: POLI 194SD.

POLI 198. Directed Group Study (2-4)
Directed group study in an area not presently covered by the departmental curriculum. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: department approval.

POLI 198RA. Research Apprenticeship (4)
Students conduct directed research as part of a principal investigator’s project and under the supervision of a department mentor. Students may conduct research with a department mentor for up to two quarters. This course is part of the Research Apprenticeship program in political science. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: department approval. Students must apply for the Research Apprenticeship program and be approved to enroll. Participants must be majors in political science with junior or senior standing and a GPA of 3.5 or higher in all political science courses taken at UC San Diego. Individual projects may require other prerequisite training, such as POLI 30.

POLI 199. Independent Study for Undergraduates (2 or 4)
Independent reading in advanced political science by individual students. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

PSYC 1. Psychology (4)
This course provides an overview of the basic concepts in psychology. Topics may include human information processing, learning and memory, motivation, development, language acquisition, social psychology, and personality.

PSYC 2. General Psychology: Biological Foundations (4)
This course provides an introductory survey of the relationship between human behavior and brain function. Specific areas of emphasis include vision and other sensory processes, memory, motivation, attention, and cognition.

PSYC 3. General Psychology: Cognitive Foundations (4)
This course provides an introduction to the basic concepts of cognitive psychology. Topics include perception, attention, memory, language, and thought. The relation of cognitive psychology to cognitive science and to neuropsychology is also covered.

PSYC 3R. General Psychology: Cognitive Foundations (4)
This course provides an introduction to the basic concepts of cognitive psychology. Topics include perception, attention, memory, language, and thought. The relation of cognitive psychology to cognitive science and to neuropsychology is also covered.

PSYC 4. General Psychology: Behavioral Foundations (4)
This course provides an introduction to behavioral psychology. Topics include classical conditioning, operant conditioning, animal learning, and motivation and behavior modification.

PSYC 6. General Psychology: Social Foundations (4)
This course provides an introduction to social psychology. Topics may include emotion, aesthetics, behavioral medicine, person perception, attitudes and attitude change, and behavior in social organizations.

PSYC 7. General Psychology: Developmental Foundations (4)
This course provides an introduction to theories and research results in developmental psychology, covering infancy through adulthood.

PSYC 60. Introduction to Statistics (4)
This course provides an introduction to both descriptive and inferential statistics, core tools in the process of scientific discovery and the interpretation of research.

PSYC 70. Research Methods in Psychology (4)
This course provides an overview of how to choose appropriate research methods for experimental and nonexperimental studies. Topics may include classic experimental design and counterbalancing, statistical power, and causal inference in experimental and nonexperimental settings. Prerequisites: PSYC 60 or equivalent.

PSYC 71. Laboratory in Psychological Research Methods (4)
This course provides hands-on research experience. Lecture topics will include experimental and nonexperimental designs, research ethics, data analysis, and causal inference. Students will design original research projects, collect and analyze data, and write a full APA-style report, including a brief literature review relevant to their design. This course builds on PSYC 70 by applying design principles to students’ own research questions and ideas. Open to the following Department of Psychology majors only: PC26, PC28, PC29, PC30, PC31, PC32, PC33. Prerequisites: COGS 14B or PSYC 60 or MATH 11 and PSYC 70 or COGS 14A.

PSYC 81. Laboratory in Brain, Behavior, and Evolution (4)
This course provides students the opportunity to learn about the intricate relationship that exists between brain and behavior, as well as the evolutionary forces that shape this interaction. Lectures for this course aim to introduce students to some of the best examples in the literature that highlight these issues, while a parallel component of the course aims to introduce students to performing research on the topic. Open to the following Department of Psychology majors only: PC26, PC28, PC29, PC30, PC31, PC32, PC33. Prerequisites: COGS 14B or PSYC 60 or MATH 11 and PSYC 70 or COGS 14A.

PSYC 87. First-year Seminar (1)
The First-year Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year Seminars can be offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students.

PSYC 88. Learning Sustainable Well-Being: Compassion for Self and Others (1)
This experiential course teaches the art of practicing psychological well-being based on principles from Eastern and Western philosophies (e.g., mindfulness, positive psychology, cognitive therapy, and neuroscience). Each week, there is a short lecture on a given topic, combined with workshop-style exercises.

PSYC 90. Undergraduate Seminar (1)
This seminar introduces the various subdisciplines in psychology and their research methods, and also explores career and graduate school opportunities. This includes informal presentations by faculty, graduate students, and other professionals.

PSYC 93. Topics in Psychology (4)
Selected topics in the field of psychology. May be repeated for credit as topics vary.

PSYC 99. Independent Study in Psychology (2 or 4)
Independent study or research under direction of a member of the faculty. May be taken up to three times for a maximum of twelve units. Prerequisites: lower-division standing, completion of at least thirty units of undergraduate study at UC San Diego with a minimum UC San Diego GPA of 3.0; completed and approved Special Studies form.

PSYC 100. Clinical Psychology (4)
This course provides a comprehensive overview of the causes, characteristics, and treatment of psychological disorders. Particular emphasis is given to the interaction between biological, psychological, and sociocultural processes contributing to abnormal behavior. Students may not receive credit for both PSYC 163 and PSYC 100. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 101. Developmental Psychology (4)
This course provides a comprehensive overview of the field of developmental psychology, including topics in cognitive, language, and social development. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 102. Sensory Neuroscience (4)
This course provides a comprehensive overview of the neural mechanisms that support vision, audition, touch, olfaction, and taste. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 104. Social Psychology (4)
This course provides a comprehensive overview of the field of social psychology, covering a review of the field’s founding principles, classic findings, and a survey of recent findings. Topics will include social perception, attributions and attitudes, stereotypies, social influence, group dynamics, and aggressive and prosocial tendencies. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 105. Cognitive Psychology (4)
This course provides a comprehensive overview of cognitive psychology, the scientific study of mental processes: how people acquire, store, transform, use, and communicate information. Topics may include perception, attention, language, memory, reasoning, problem solving, decision-making, and creativity. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 106. Behavioral Neuroscience (4)
This course provides a comprehensive overview of human and animal behavior from a neuroscience perspective. Topics include the functions and mechanisms of perception, motivation (sex, sleep, hunger, emotions), learning and memory, and motor control and movement. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 108. Cognitive Neuroscience (4)
This course provides a comprehensive overview of neuroanatomy and major methods and results from neuroimaging and neuropsychological studies of behavior. Topics include attention, motor control, executive function, memory, learning, emotion, and language. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 110. Juniors Honors Research Seminars (4)
This course provides research seminars by a range of departmental faculty, exposing students to contemporary research problems in many areas of psychology. Class discussions will follow faculty presentations. Must be taken for a letter grade for the Psychology Honors Program. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Admission by application. Department approval.

PSYC 111A. Research Methods I (6)
This course provides training in applying advanced statistical methods to experimental design. Emphasis will be placed on the developing skills in statistical problem-solving, using computer applications, and writing scientific reports. Must be taken for a letter grade for the Psychology Honors Program. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Open to honors students or by consent of instructor. Instructor and department approval.

PSYC 111B. Research Methods II (6)
This course builds upon the material of PSYC 111A. Students will participate in data collection, data organization, statistical analysis and graphical analysis, with emphasis placed on developing scientific report writing, presentations, and critical thinking about experimental methods. Must be taken for a letter grade for the Psychology Honors Program. Prerequisites: PSYC 111A; upper-division standing. Instructor and department approval.

PSYC 113. Electroencephalogram (EEG) Lab (4)
This course provides training in the design, execution, and analysis of electroencephalogram (EEG) experiments to study perception and cognition. The course will provide basic background on the EEG methodology: what and how neural signals are measured with EEG, how to interpret them, and how to design experiments. It will also provide hands-on training on conducting an EEG study: we will design and run experiments together in the laboratory, analyze the data, and discuss the results. Prerequisites: PSYC 60 or COGS 14B or MATH 11, and PSYC 70 or COGS 14A, and COGS 101A or COGS 107A or COGS 107B or COGS 107C or PSYC 102 or PSYC 106 or PSYC 108. Department approval.

PSYC 114. Psychophysiological Perspectives on the Social Mind Laboratory (4)
This course provides an overview and training in the use of psychophysiological methods to investigate the cognitive and emotional process involved in understanding and reacting to other people. Students will develop individual research questions and actively participate in designing and conducting the experiments. Open to the following majors only: PC26, PC28, PC29, PC30, PC31, PC32, PC33, PC34, CG32. Prerequisites: upper-division standing, PSYC 60 or COGS 14B or MATH 11 and PSYC 70 or COGS 14A.

PSYC 115A. Laboratory in Cognitive Psychology I (4)
This course provides training in the design, execution, and analysis of cognitive psychology experiments. Students may not receive credit for both PSYC 115 and PSYC 115A. Open to the following majors only: PC26, PC28, PC29, PC30, PC31, PC32, PC33, PC34, CG32. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and PSYC 60 or equivalent; an interview with the instructor is required.

PSYC 115B. Laboratory in Cognitive Psychology II (4)
This course is designed to extend the training of PSYC 115A in the design, execution, and analysis of cognitive psychology experiments. Students may not receive credit for both PSYC 115 and PSYC 115B. Open to the following Department of Psychology majors only: PC26, PC28, PC29, PC30, PC31, PC32, PC33, PC34, CG32. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and PSYC 115A. Instructor and department approval.

PSYC 116A. Laboratory in Clinical Psychology Research I (4)
This course, the first in a sequence of three courses, provides an applied examination of theory, research design, and methods for clinical research to support an independent study in research at a clinical research lab. Prerequisites: upper-division standing, PSYC 70, PSYC 100, and instructor and department approval.

PSYC 116B. Laboratory in Clinical Psychology Research II (4)
This course, the second in a sequence of three courses, provides an advanced applied examination of theory, research design, and methods for clinical research to support an independent study in research at a clinical research lab. Prerequisites: PSYC 116A.

PSYC 116C. Laboratory in Clinical Psychology Research III (4)
This course, the third in a sequence of three courses, provides the culmination of an applied examination of theory, research design, and methods for clinical research to support an independent study in research at a clinical research lab. Prerequisites: PSYC 116B.

PSYC 117. Laboratory in Educational Research and Outreach (4)
This course provides experience conducting educational research and outreach for children in greater San Diego County. May be taken for credit three times. Open to the following majors only: PC26, PC28, PC29, PC30, PC31, PC32, PC33, PC34, CG32. Prerequisites: upper-division standing, PSYC 60 or COGS 14B and PSYC 70 or COGS 14A. Instructor approval.

PSYC 118. Laboratory in Animal Behavior (4)
This course provides an opportunity to learn about the various evolutionary forces that shape a species’ natural behavioral repertoire while also conducting research related to these issues. Classroom lectures on topics related to ethology will be complemented by a research project in which students collect observational data on animal behavior. Open to the following majors only: PC26, PC28, PC29, PC30, PC31, PC32, PC33, PC34, CG32. Prerequisites: upper-division standing, PSYC 60 or COGS 14B or MATH 11 and PSYC 70 or COGS 14A, and department approval.

PSYC 120. Learning and Motivation (4)
This course provides a survey of research and theory in learning and motivation. Topics include instincts, reinforcement, stimulus control, choice, and human application. Open to the following majors only: PC26, PC28, PC29, PC30, PC31, PC32, PC33, PC34, CG32. Prerequisites: upper-division standing, PSYC 60 or COGS 14B and PSYC 70 or COGS 14A. Must be taken concurrently with PSYC 121 or PSYC 140.

PSYC 121. Laboratory in Operant Psychology (4)
This course provides laboratory experience in operant psychology. Open to the following majors only: PC26, PC28, PC29, PC30, PC31, PC32, PC33, PC34, CG32. Prerequisites: upper-division standing, PSYC 60 or COGS 14B and PSYC 70 or COGS 14A. May be taken concurrently with PSYC 120.

PSYC 122. Mechanisms of Animal Behavior (4)
This course focuses on approaches to the study of behavior and its underlying fundamental units of analysis in human and nonhuman animals. Students may not receive credit for both PSYC 122 and PSYC 103. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 123. Cognitive Control and Frontal Lobe Function (4)
This course provides an understanding of how the frontal lobes allow us to engage in complex mental processes. Topics may include anatomy and theory of prefrontal function, frontal lobe clinical syndromes, pharmacology and genetics, emotion control, and cognitive training. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Instructor and department approval.

PSYC 124. Clinical Assessment and Treatment (4)
This course provides an introduction to the history, purpose, and recent changes to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders along with appropriate evidence-based interventions. Other topics include psychiatric emergencies, crisis management, and ethics. Recommended preparation: Completion of PSYC 100. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 125. Clinical Neuropsychology (4)
This course provides a fundamental understanding of brain-behavior relationships as applied to the practice of clinical neuropsychology. Major topics include functional neuroanatomy, principles of neuropsychological assessment and diagnosis, and the neuropsychological presentation of common neurologic and psychiatric conditions. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 126. Practicum in Community Mental Health Care (4)
This course provides experience with clients in a community mental health care setting, under professional supervision. Seminar-based instruction also provides a framework for understanding theoretical, practical, and ethical issues related to client care. Prerequisites: PSYC 100 and PSYC 124 and department approval.

PSYC 127. Sexual Health Inequities and Sexual Well-Being (4)
This course provides an overview of sexual health inequities and sexual well-being. Students will engage critically and reflexively in topics related to race/ethnicity, gender, and sexual orientation. Open to the following Department of Psychology majors only: PC25, PC26, PC28, PC29, PC30, PC31, PC32, PC33, PC34, PC35. Prerequisites: upper-division standing, PSYC 60, PSYC 70, PSYC 172.

PSYC 128. Psychology of Reading (4)
This course provides basic information about the nature of reading. Topics include word recognition, eye movements, inner speech, sentence processing, memory for text, learning to read, methods for teaching reading, reading disabilities and dyslexia, and speed-reading. Recommended preparation: completion of PSYC 105 or PSYC 145. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 129. Logic of Perception (4)
This course provides an overview of how we perceive the world. Topics include classic studies in perception, discussion of the view that perception is “logical,” and new insights into the neural mechanisms underlying perception. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 130. Delay of Gratification (4)
This course provides a review of research on delay of gratification. Topics include what makes it so tough, in what situations it is possible, who can do it, and the implications of this ability. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 131. Scientific Racism: Genetics, Intelligence, and Race (4)
This course provides a background into the origins and implementation of scientific racism, especially since the nineteenth century. Topics may include race/ethnicity and genetics, intelligence, nationalism, criminality, human performance, and morphometry. Open to the following Department of Psychology majors only: PC25, PC26, PC28, PC29, PC30, PC31, PC32, PC33, PC34, PC35. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 132. Hormones and Behavior (4)
This course examines how hormones influence a variety of behaviors and how behavior reciprocally influences hormones. Specific topics covered include aggression, sex and sexuality, feeding, learning, memory, mood and neural mechanisms both in humans and nonhuman animals. Recommended preparation: completion of PSYC 106. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 133. Circadian Rhythms—Biological Clocks (4)
This interdisciplinary course provides an overview of the fundamental properties of daily biological clocks of diverse species, from humans to microbes. Emphasis is placed on the relevance of internal time keeping in wide-ranging contexts including human performance, health, and industry. Cross-listed with BIMM 116/PSYC 133R. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. BILD 1 or COGS 107B or PSYC 106 or consent of instructor.

PSYC 133R. Circadian Rhythms—Biological Clocks (4)
This interdisciplinary course provides an overview of the fundamental properties of daily biological clocks of diverse species, from humans to microbes. Emphasis is placed on the relevance of internal timekeeping in wide-ranging contexts including human performance, health, and industry. Cross-listed with BIMM 116/PSYC 133. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. BILD 1 or COGS 107B or PSYC 106 or consent of instructor.

PSYC 134. Eating Disorders (4)
This course provides an overview of the biology and psychology of eating disorders such as anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge eating disorder. Abnormal, as well as normal, eating will be discussed from various perspectives including endocrinological, neurobiological, psychological, sociological, and evolutionary. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 136. Cognitive Development (4)
This course provides an overview of how children’s thinking develops. Topics may include perception, concept formation, memory, problem solving, and social cognition. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; PSYC 101 or PSYC 105.

PSYC 137. Social Cognition (4)
This course provides an overview of social cognition, which blends cognitive and social psychology to understand how people make sense of the social world. Topics may include social perception, inference, memory, motivation, affect, understanding the self, stereotypes, and cultural cognition. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 138. Sound and Music Perception (4)
This course provides an overview of auditory perception. Topics may include the physiology of the auditory system, perception of pitch, loudness, and timbre, sound localization, perception of melodic and temporal patterns and musical illusions and paradoxes. Recommended preparation: ability to read musical notation. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 139. The Social Psychology of Sport (4)
This course provides an introduction to the applications of social psychological principles and findings to sports. Topics include motivation, level of aspiration, competition, cooperation, social comparison, and optimal arousal. Additional topics may include the perspective of spectators, discussing motivation and perceptions of success, streaks, and such. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 140. Human Behavior Laboratory (4)
This course provides training in applying the principles of human behavior, including choice behavior, self-control, and reasoning. Open to the following majors only: PC26, PC28, PC29, PC30, PC31, PC32, PC33, PC34, CG32. Prerequisites: upper-division standing, PSYC 60 or COGS 14B and PSYC 70 or COGS 14A. Must be taken concurrently with PSYC 120.

PSYC 141. Evolution and Human Nature (4)
This course provides insight into the question of whether important aspects of human behavior can be explained as resulting from natural selection. Topics include sex differences, selfishness and altruism, homicide and violence, and context effects of human reasoning. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 142. Psychology of Consciousness (4)
This course provides a survey of research on consciousness from an experimental psychology perspective. Special emphasis will be placed on cognitive, neuroimaging, and clinical/psychiatric investigative techniques, and on the scientific assessment of the mind-body problem. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 143. Control and Analysis of Human Behavior (4)
This course provides an overview of the behavioral approach, including basic principles, self-control, clinical applications, and the design of cultures. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 144. Memory and Amnesia (4)
This course will provide a survey of current research and theory concerning human memory and amnesia from both cognitive and neuropsychological perspectives. Topics may include short-term (working) memory, encoding and retrieval, episodic and semantic memory, interference and forgetting, false memory, eyewitness memory, emotion and memory, famous case studies of amnesia, and the effects of aging and dementia on memory. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 145. Psychology of Language (4)
This course provides an overview of language comprehension and production. Topics include animal communication, language development, and language disorders. Recommended preparation: completion of a course in language, cognition, or philosophy of the mind. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 146. Language and Conceptual Development (4)
This course provides an introduction to research on language acquisition and its relationship to conceptual development. Topics include theoretical foundations (e.g., learning mechanisms, theories of concepts) and empirical case studies, including word learning, syntax and semantics, and language and thought. Recommended preparation: completion of a course in language/linguistics, cognition, or cognitive development. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 147. Gender (4)
This course provides an overview of the role of gender in psychology, with an emphasis on critical thinking about gender. Topics may include gender differences in behavior and communication, influences on gender roles, gender identity, and gender effects on health and well-being. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 148. Psychology of Judgment and Decision (4)
This course provides an overview of judgment and decision making, which is broadly concerned with preferences, subjective probability, and how they are combined to arrive at decisions. History and current topics will be covered. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 150. Cognitive Neuroscience of Vision (4)
This course provides an overview of the neural basis of visual experience, or how our brain creates what we see in the world around us. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; COGS 101A or COGS 107C or PSYC 102 or PSYC 108.

PSYC 151. Tests and Measurement (4)
This course provides an introduction to psychology testing. Topics include psychometrics and statistical methods of test construction; application of psychological tests in industry, clinical practice, and applied settings; and controversies in the application of psychological tests. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; COGS 14B or MATH 11 or PSYC 60.

PSYC 152. Conceptions of Intelligence (4)
This course provides an overview of the concept of intelligence from multiple perspectives. Topics include how intelligence is measured and the role of this measurement on practical matters, the role of intelligence in comparative psychology, and attempts to analyze intelligence in terms of more fundamental cognitive processes. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 153. Psychology of Emotion (4)
This course provides an overview of past and current theories of emotion. Topics include facial expressions associated with emotion, psychophysiology, evolutionary perspectives, and specific emotions such as anger, fear, and jealousy. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 154. Behavior Modification (4)
The course provides an extension of learning principles to human behavior. Topics include broad implications of a behavioral perspective, applied behavior analysis, and applications of behavioral principles to clinical disorders and to normal behavior in varied settings. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 155. Health Psychology (4)
This course provides an exploration of health, illness, and treatment as they relate to psychological concepts and considers how stress influences the body’s physiological systems and risk for physical illnesses. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 156. Cognitive Development in Infancy (4)
This course provides an overview of infant development. Students will critically evaluate scientific theories regarding infant cognitive, linguistic, and social behavior. Recommended preparation: PSYC 60. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; PSYC 101 or HDS 1.

PSYC 157. Happiness (4)
This course provides an overview of the psychology of happiness. Topics may include such questions as: What is happiness? How do we measure it, and how do we tell who has it? What is the biology of happiness and what is its evolutionary significance? What makes people happy—youth, fortune, marriage, chocolate? Is the pursuit of happiness pointless? Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 158. Interpersonal Relationships (4)
This course provides an examination of theories and empirical work pertaining to interpersonal relationships. Topics include attraction, jealousy, attachments, and love. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 159. Physiological Basis of Perception (4)
This course provides a survey of sensory and perceptual phenomena with an emphasis on their underlying physiological mechanisms. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; PSYC 102 or COGS 101A.

PSYC 161. Engineering Psychology (4)
This course provides a survey of psychological findings relevant to designing “user-friendly” computers and devices and improving aviation and traffic safety. Topics include human perception as it pertains to displays and image compression, human memory limitations relevant to usability, and nature of human errors. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 162. Psychology and the Law (4)
This course provides an overview of the intersection between psychology and the legal system, covering a broad range of forensically relevant issues. Topics may include false memories, false confessions, eyewitness reliability, lie detection, DNA exonerations of the wrongfully convicted, jury decision making, and neuroscience and the law. Recommended preparation: PSYC 60. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 164. Criminology (4)
This course provides the classic and new disciplinary paradigms explaining criminal behavior using developmental, environmental, cultural, social, and personality theory perspectives and methods. The course will include different manifestations of crime (e.g., violent, white-collar, organized) and the influences of criminal justice responses (punishment, rehabilitation, recidivism, etc.). Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 166. History of Psychology (4)
This course provides a survey of the major trends and figures in the development of psychology as a field. Topics may include the mind-body problem, nativism vs. empiricism, and the genesis of behaviorism. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 167. Science of Imagination (4)
This seminar explores how psychologists think about and study the imagination—the capacity to mentally transcend time, place, and circumstance to think about what might have been, plan and anticipate the future, create and become absorbed in fictional worlds, and consider alternatives to actual experiences. You will learn how to evaluate psychological evidence, and how to read, interpret, discuss, present, and write about scientific literature. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. PC25, PC26, PS28, PC29, PC30, PC31, PC32, PC33, PC34, PC35, HS25, HS26, HS27, HS28, HD01, HD02, HD25, HD26, or CG32 major only.

PSYC 168. Psychological Disorders of Childhood (4)
This course provides an overview of psychological disorders in children. Topics may include anxiety disorders, depressive and bipolar disorders, communication and learning disorders, conduct problems, autism, and other conditions. Emphasis is placed on symptomatology, assessment, etiological factors, epidemiology, and treatment. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 169. Brain Damage and Mental Function (4)
This course provides an introduction to the neural mechanisms underlying perception, memory, language, and other mental capacities. Topics include how brain damage affects these capacities and how patients with brain lesions can contribute to our understanding of the normal brain. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 170. Cognitive Neuropsychology (4)
This course provides a journey to the interface between neurophysiology and psychology. Topics include neuroimaging and neuroplasticity. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 171. Neurobiology of Learning and Memory (4)
This course provides an overview of the neurobiology of learning and memory, from cognitive to molecular neuroscience, including human, animal, cellular, and molecular studies of memory. Topics include amnesia, intellectual disability, exceptional intelligence, aging, and Alzheimer’s disease. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and BILD 12 or COGS 107B or COGS 17 or PSYC 106 or PSYC 181 or PSYC 181GS or PSYC 2.

PSYC 172. Psychology of Human Sexuality (4)
This course provides an overview of human sexuality research including diversity of sexual behavior and identities, sex and gender development, intimate relationships, and sexual dysfunction. Recommended preparation: completion of PSYC 1, 2, or 106. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 173. Psychology of Food and Behavior (4)
This course provides an overview of the biological, psychological, and social influences on the psychology of food and behavior. Topics may include taste preferences and aversions and how they are learned, how culture influences food selection, and food-related behaviors across the lifespan. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 174. Visual Cognition (4)
This course provides an overview of high-level visual perception, and of how visual perception intersects with attention, memory, and concepts. Topics may include an introduction to the visual system with an emphasis on high-level visual regions; object recognition, face recognition, scene recognition and reading; visual attention, including eye movements during scene perception and during reading; and visual working memory. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 175. Science of Mindfulness (4)
This course provides a review of the scientific research surrounding the topic of Mindfulness, which has been approached from multiple disciplines including Buddhism, Positive Psychology, Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, and Neuroscience. Because Mindfulness is so multi-faceted, with many variables involved, the scientific study of Mindfulness requires rigorous research methods and statistics, and for this reason, a significant portion of the class focuses on these aspects. Prerequisites: upper-division standing, COGS 14B or MATH 11 or PSYC 60, and COGS 14A or PSYC 70. Department approval.

PSYC 176. Creativity (4)
This course provides an overview of how to foster creativity in individuals, groups, and organizations. Themes that cut across all three levels are highlighted. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 178. Industrial Organizational Psychology (4)
This course provides an examination of human behavior in industrial, business, and organizational settings. Topics include psychological principles applied to selection, placement, management, and training; the effectiveness of individuals and groups within organizations, including leadership and control; conflict and cooperation; motivation; and organizational structure and design. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 179. Drugs, Addiction, and Mental Disorders (4)
This course provides an overview of the use, abuse, liability, and psychotherapeutic effects of drugs on humans. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 180. Adolescence (4)
This course provides an overview of the period of human adolescence, including the physical, cognitive, social, and emotional changes that take place during this developmental transition. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 181. Psychopharmacology—Drugs and Behavior (4)
This course provides an overview of basic principles of psychopharmacology, including psychological effects, brain mode of action, and patterns of use of psychoactive agents. Drugs discussed may include drugs of abuse and psychotherapeutics such as stimulants, opioids, sedative hypnotics, hallucinogens, marijuana, alcohol, cognitive enhancers, anxiolytics, antidepressants, and antipsychotics. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 182. Illusions and the Brain (4)
This course provides an examination of visual, auditory, and tactile illusions and examines how they arise from interactions between perceptual and cognitive systems. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 184. Choice and Self-Control (4)
This course provides an overview of the experimental analysis of choice behavior, with an emphasis on the types of choice involved in self-control. A central interest will be the conditions under which decision-making is optimal. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 185. Psychology of Climate Crisis (4)
This course provides tools for the student to think about the escalating climate crisis. Urgent action is needed at a large, societal scale to prevent the worst consequences of anthropogenic global heating. Better understanding the prospects for such action can come from human psychology. How do people arrive at their beliefs? What is the basis of denial and delay? How does belief flow to action? What kinds of actions can people take? Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 186. Evolutionary Psychology (4)
This course provides an overview of the forces that shaped the human brain and behavior over our evolutionary history. The first part of the course will provide the key background on evolutionary principles and human natural history. The second part of the course will delve into the origins of defining characteristics of human cognition, such as language and theory of mind, by drawing on our understanding of both human evolution and comparisons with our living nonhuman primate relatives. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 186GS. Global Seminar—Early History of Psychiatry: Psychiatry, Neuroscience, and Pharmacology of the Renaissance through the Enlightenment (4)
This course provides a survey of the rebirth of life sciences during the Renaissance, the emergence of psychiatry as a distinct science, and the emergence of modern pharmacology from the Reformation to the early modern period. Prerequisites: Students must submit applications to the International Center Programs Abroad Office and be accepted into the Global Seminar Program.

PSYC 187. Development of Social Cognition (4)
This course provides an overview of how children learn to reason about the social world. Topics may include theory of mind, social categorization and stereotyping, moral reasoning, and cultural learning. Recommended preparation: PSYC 101. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 188. Impulse Control Disorders (4)
This course provides an overview of problems of impulse control, which are important features of major psychiatric disorders and also of atypical patterns of behavior including pathological gambling, compulsive sex, eating, exercise, and shopping. Topics include development, major common features, treatment, and neurobiological basis of impulse control disorders. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 189. Brain, Behavior, and Evolution (4)
This course provides a survey of natural behaviors, including birdsong, prey capture, localization, electroreception and echolocation, and the neural system that controls them, emphasizing broad fundamental relationships between brain and behavior across species. Cross-listed with BIPN 189. Students may not receive credit for PSYC 189 and BIPN 189. Prerequisites: upper-division standing, BILD 2 or COGS 101A or COGS 107B or PSYC 102 or PSYC 106.

PSYC 190. Science of Parenting (4)
This course provides an interdisciplinary overview of theories and scientific research on parenting. Topics may include family structure, parenting styles, attachment, discipline strategies, culture, and media. This course also takes a critical approach to the scientific evidence regarding the role of parents in child development. Topics may include behavior genetics, discipline, diet, sleep, the nature of learning, screen time, impulse control, and vaccination. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 191. Psychology of Sleep (4)
This course provides an overview of the psychology of sleep, including sleep stages and their functions, neurological aspects of sleep, sleep across species and development, dreams and their interpretation, sleep disorders, and the role of sleep in learning and memory. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 192. Senior Seminar in Psychology (1)
The Senior Seminar Program is designed to allow senior undergraduates to meet with faculty members in a small setting to explore an intellectual topic in psychology (at the upper-division level). Topics will vary from quarter to quarter. Senior Seminars may be taken for credit up to four times, with a change in topic, and permission of the department. Enrollment is limited to twenty students, with preference given to seniors. Prerequisites: department approval and consent of instructor.

PSYC 193. Topics in Psychology (4)
Selected topics in the field of psychology. May be taken for credit three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and department approval.

PSYC 193L. Psychology Laboratory Topics (4)
Selected laboratory topics in the field of psychology. May be taken for credit two times as topics vary. Open to the following majors only: PC26, PC28, PC29, PC30, PC31, PC32, PC33, PC34, CG32. Prerequisites: upper-division standing, department approval, and PSYC 60 or COGS 14B or MATH 11 and PSYC 70 or COGS 14A.

PSYC 194A. Honors Thesis I (4)
This course provides the opportunity for students to plan and carry out a research project under the guidance of the psychology faculty. Students will write a proposal for the research that they plan to conduct in 194B-C and will present this proposal to the class. Must be taken for a letter grade for the Psychology Honors Program. Prerequisites: PSYC 110, PSYC 111A-B, department approval, psychology majors only, acceptance to the Honors Program.

PSYC 194B. Honors Thesis II (4)
This course provides the opportunity for students to continue to carry out their research projects. Must be taken for a letter grade for the Psychology Honors Program. Prerequisites: PSYC 110, PSYC 111A-B, PSYC 194A, department approval, psychology majors only, acceptance to the Honors program.

PSYC 194C. Honors Thesis III (4)
This course provides the opportunity for students to complete their research, write their honors thesis, and present their results at the Honors Poster Session. Must be taken for a letter grade for the Psychology Honors Program. Prerequisites: PSYC 194A-B, department approval, psychology majors only, acceptance to the Honors program.

PSYC 195. Instruction in Psychology (1 or 4)
Introduction to teaching a psychology course. As an undergraduate instructional apprentice, students will attend the lectures of the course, hold weekly meetings with students of the course, hold weekly meetings with course instructor. Responsibilities may include class presentations, designing and leading weekly discussion sections, assisting with homework and exam grading, and monitoring and responding to online discussion posts. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit two times. Only four units can be applied toward the psychology minor or major as upper-division psychology elective credit. Prerequisites: eligibility includes all of the following: upper-division standing, a minimum of A– in the course in which the student plans to assist, a 3.0 cumulative UC GPA, instructor and department approval.

PSYC 196A-B-C. Research Seminar (4-4-4)
Weekly research seminar, three quarter research project under faculty guidance which culminates in a thesis. Must be taken for a letter grade to satisfy major requirements for Department of Psychology majors. Open to the following majors only: PC25, PC26, PC28, PC29, PC30, PC31, PC32, PC33, PC34, PC35. Prerequisites: upper-division standing, instructor and department approval.

PSYC 198. Directed Group Study in Psychology (2 or 4)
Group study under the direction of a faculty member in the Department of Psychology. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

PSYC 199. Independent Study (2, 3, 4)
Independent study or laboratory research under direction of faculty in the Department of Psychology. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit nine times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and department approval.

FMPH 40. Introduction to Public Health (4)
This course provides an introduction to the infrastructure of public health; the analytical tools employed by public health practitioners; bio-psychosocial perspectives of public health problems; health promotion/disease prevention; quality assessment in public health; and legal and ethical concerns. Must be taken for a letter grade to be applied to the public health major. Renumbered from FPMU 40. Students may not receive credit for FPMU 40 and FMPH 40. Prerequisites: restricted enrollment to first-year, sophomore, and junior standing.

FMPH 50. Primary Care and Public Health (4)
This course explores historical and current interactions, achievements, and challenges of primary care and public health. It will analyze the impact of common medical conditions such as obesity, diabetes, mental health disorders, and others on individuals, their families, and society. Must be taken for a letter grade to be applied to the public health major. Renumbered from FPMU 50. Students may not receive credit for FPMU 50 and FMPH 50. Prerequisites: restricted enrollment to first-year, sophomore, junior, and senior standing.

FMPH 101. Epidemiology (4)
This course covers the basic principles of epidemiology, with applications to investigations of noninfectious (“chronic”) and infectious diseases. Explores various study designs appropriate for disease surveillance and studies of etiology and prevention. Must be taken for a letter grade to be applied to the public health major. Renumbered from FPMU 101. Students may not receive credit for FMPH 101 and either FPMU 101 or FPMU 101A. Prerequisites: FMPH 40, PSYC 60 or MATH 11 or COGS 14B, and upper-division standing.

FMPH 102. Biostatistics in Public Health (4)
Fundamentals of biostatistics and basic methods for analysis of continuous and binary outcomes for one, two, or several groups. Includes: summarizing and displaying data; probability; statistical distributions; central limit theorem, confidence intervals, hypothesis testing; comparing means of continuous variables between two groups; comparing proportions between two groups; simple and multiple linear regression. Hands-on data analysis using software and statistical applications in public health. Must be taken for a letter grade to be applied to the public health major. Renumbered from FPMU 102. Students may not receive credit for FMPH 102 and either FPMU 101B or FPMU 102. Prerequisites: FMPH 40, PSYC 60 or MATH 11 or COGS 14B, and upper-division standing.

FMPH 110. Health Behavior and Chronic Diseases (4)
This course introduces health behavior concepts through applications to chronic disease prevention. The focus is on smoking, dietary behaviors, and physical activity and is organized around relationships to health, measurement, influencing factors, interventions, and translation to public health practice. Must be taken for a letter grade to be applied to the public health major. Renumbered from FPMU 110. Students may not receive credit for FPMU 110 and FMPH 110. Prerequisites: FMPH 40. Restricted enrollment to sophomore, junior, and senior standing.

FMPH 120. Health Policies for Healthy Lifestyles (4)
This course covers the rationale for and effectiveness of policies to influence nutrition, physical activity, and substance use behavior. Policies include legalization, taxation, labeling, produce manufacturing, warning labels, licensing, marketing, and counter-marketing practices and restrictions on use. Must be taken for a letter grade to be applied to the public health major. Renumbered from FPMU 120. Students may not receive credit for FPMU 120 and FMPH 120. Prerequisites: FMPH 40 and upper-division standing.

FMPH 130. Environmental and Occupational Health (4)
This core public health course addresses the fundamentals of environmental and occupational health, including identification of hazards, basic toxicology, risk assessment, prevention/protection, and regulatory/control policies. Specific environmental and occupational hazards and relevant case studies will be presented. Must be taken for a letter grade to be applied to the public health major. Renumbered from FPMU 130. Students may not receive credit for FPMU 130 and FMPH 130. Prerequisites: FMPH 50, FMPH 101, and upper-division standing.

FMPH 155. Qualitative Research for Global Public Health (4)
An overview of the role of qualitative research methods in public health. The course will focus on qualitative research as it relates to formative program design, community-based participatory approaches, and as a tool for amplifying voices and elucidating both complex social-ecological processes and internal individual experiences. Throughout the term, students will work in teams to design, conduct, analyze, and report a full qualitative study on a public health topic of their choosing. Must be taken for a letter grade to be applied to the public health major. Students may not receive credit for FMPH 155 and FMPH 191 subtitled “Qualitative Research for Global Public Health.” Prerequisites: FMPH 40. Restricted enrollment to sophomore, junior, and senior standing.

FMPH 161. Clinical Nutrition in Public Health (4)
Clinical nutrition is the study of nutrition and diet as related to the prevention and treatment of human disease. The practical and psychosocial aspects of diet modification and food/food product availability are key aspects of clinical nutrition practice, whether individual or community based, irrespective of whether the goal is primary prevention or disease treatment. Students will identify applications and translation of nutritional guidelines and recommendations into behavior in the course. Must be taken for a letter grade to be applied to the public health major. Students may not receive credit for FMPH 161 and FMPH 191 subtitled “Clinical Nutrition in Public Health.” Prerequisites: FMPH 40. Restricted enrollment to sophomore, junior, and senior standing.

FMPH 171. Field Epidemiology and Outbreak Investigations (4)
This course consists of a series of practical epidemiological infectious and non-infectious disease paper- and computer-based exercises. Students will have the opportunity to apply their epidemiological and biostatistical skills to real-world situations. The course is highly interactive and challenges students’ knowledge and critical thinking capacities. Students will give presentations, write a scientific abstract and press release, and develop a poster. Must be taken for a letter grade to be applied to the public health major. Students may not receive credit for FMPH 171 and FMPH 191 subtitled “Field Epidemiology and Outbreak Investigations.” Prerequisites: FMPH 40 and FMPH 101. Restricted enrollment to sophomore, junior, and senior standing.

FMPH 191. Topics in Public Health (4)
Selected topics in the field of public health. Must be taken for a letter grade to be applied to the public health major. May be taken for credit up to three times. Prerequisites: FMPH 40. Restricted enrollment to sophomore, junior, and senior standing. Department approval required.

FMPH 193. Public Capstone I (4)
This is the first of a two-part capstone series that serves as the culminating experience for the BS in public health (BSPH) majors. Students will integrate the skills and knowledge gained throughout the BSPH program and learn critical elements of public health research and practice. Must be taken for a letter grade to be applied to the public health major. Prerequisites: FMPH 40, FMPH 50, FMPH 101, FMPH 102, and FMPH 110. Department approval required. Restricted to senior public health majors only (FP25).

FMPH 194. Public Capstone II (4)
This is the second of a two-part capstone series that serves as the culminating experience for the BS in public health (BSPH) majors. Students will interpret and contextualize findings from their projects completed in the first part of the series. Oral and written presentations will focus on disseminating public health information in diverse formats. Must be taken for a letter grade to be applied to the public health major. Prerequisites: FMPH 40, FMPH 50, FMPH 101, FMPH 102, FMPH 110, FMPH 120, and FMPH 193. Department approval required. Restricted to senior public health majors only (FP25).

FMPH 195. Instruction in Public Health (4)
Introduction to teaching in a public health course. As an undergraduate instructional apprentice, students will attend the lectures of the course, weekly meetings with students of the course, and weekly meetings with the course instructor. Responsibilities may include class presentations, designing and leading weekly discussion sections, assisting with homework and exam grading, and monitoring and responding to online discussion posts. Renumbered from FPMU 195. FMPH 195 and/or FPMU 195 may be taken for credit for a combined total of two times. Prerequisites: eligibility includes all of the following: upper-division standing, a minimum of A– in the course in which the student plans to assist, a 3.0 cumulative UC GPA, and instructor and department approval.

FMPH 196A. Public Health Honors Practicum I (4)
This is the first of a three-part honors series that serves as the culminating experience for the BS in public health (BSPH) majors. Students review, reinforce, and complement skills and knowledge gained throughout the BSPH program, and prepare a proposal integrating critical elements of public health research and practice. Must be taken for a letter grade to be applied to the public health major. Prerequisites: FMPH 40, FMPH 50, FMPH 101 or FMPH 102, and FMPH 110. Department approval required. Restricted to upper-division public health majors only (FP25).

FMPH 196B. Public Health Honors Practicum II (4)
This is the second of a three-part honors series that serves as the culminating experience for the BS in public health majors. This course represents an experiential learning opportunity at a preapproved community site. Under supervision of public health faculty and pertinent site representatives, students will refine and implement the public health proposal developed in the first part of the honors series. Must be taken for a letter grade to be applied to the public health major. Prerequisites: FMPH 196A. Department approval required. Restricted to upper-division public health majors only (FP25).

FMPH 196C. Public Health Honors Practicum III (4)
This is the third of a three-part honors series that serves as the culminating experience for the BS in public health majors. Students will analyze, interpret, and contextualize findings from their projects completed in the series. Oral and written communication will focus on disseminating public health information in diverse formats, and will include a presentation and an honors thesis. Must be taken for a letter grade to be applied to the public health major. Prerequisites: FMPH 196B. Restricted to upper-division public health majors only (FP25).

FMPH 198. Directed Group Study in Public Health (1–4)
Investigation of public health topics through directed reading and discussion by a small group of students. Opportunities can also include experiential and research components. Study must be under supervision of a faculty member and approval must be secured from the faculty member prior to registering. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit a combined total of nine times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing, completion of ninety units of UC San Diego undergraduate study, a minimum UC San Diego GPA of 2.5, consent of instructor, and a completed and approved Special Studies form.

FMPH 199. Independent Study in Public Health (2–4)
Individual undergraduate study or research not covered by the present course offerings. Study or research must be under the direction of a faculty member in the Department of Family Medicine and Public Health and approval must be secured from the faculty member prior to registering. P/NP grades only. Renumbered from FPMU 199. FMPH 199 and/or FPMU 199 may be taken for credit a combined total of nine times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing, completion of ninety units of UC San Diego undergraduate study, a minimum UC San Diego GPA of 2.5, consent of instructor, and a completed and approved Special Studies form.

RELI 1. Introduction to Religion (4)
An introduction to key topics in the study of religion through the analysis of religious texts, artifacts, and/or practices. The intent is to develop basic strategies of interpretation for undertaking a critical, disciplined study of religion.

RELI 2. Comparative World Religions (4)
An introduction to the comparative study of religion, focusing on religious traditions of global significance. Although historical aspects of these traditions will be studied, emphasis will be placed on religious beliefs and practices as manifested in the contemporary world.

RELI 3. Technoscience and Religion (4)
The aim of this course is to introduce students to the complex relationship between “technoscience,” as a broad field of inquiry into the global human practices of technology combined with scientific methods, ranging from biology to computer sciences and robotics, with religion in its complex social manifestations.

RELI 87. First-year Student Seminar in Religion (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic related to the study of religion with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students.

RELI 101. Tools and Methods in the Study of Religion (4)
This course provides an advanced introduction to assumptions and norms that shape the study of religion as an academic field; to significant debates within the field; and to tools and methods used for professional research within the field.

RELI 131. Topics in Religion and Sexuality (4)
How does religiosity as a significant cultural component help mold gender and sexuality identities? The class offers topical investigations into this question. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

RELI 132. Topics in Orthodoxy and Heterodoxy (4)
Religious dogmas often develop in dialogue with alternative viewpoints that ultimately are rejected by heterodox by the dominant group. This class presents case studies in the interpretation of such ideological and sociological pairings using scriptural, literary, and analytic sources. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

RELI 134. Topics in American Religion (4)
Topical studies in the history of religion in American society, ranging from the Puritans to the New Age. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

RELI 140. Literature and Religion (4)
This course provides an introduction to the history and themes in the relationship between literature and religion from antiquity to the present. The course examines key texts in world literature such as Rumi’s Masnavi, Milton’s Paradise Lost, and Tale of the Heike. It also considers sacred texts, such as the Bhagavad Gita, Bible, Quran, and Tao Te Ching, as works of literature, and studies the relationship between literary and religious practices in various traditions.

RELI 141. Public Sphere and Religion (4)
This interdisciplinary course will explore the historical and theoretical relationship between public sphere and religion, particularly focusing on the manifestation of religious power, public ritual, and sacred theatricality in everyday spaces of life. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

RELI 142. Secularization and Religion (4)
Surveys the relationship between religion and modernity, in particular the problematic of the secularization theory; covers cases such as Catholic liberation theology and Islamic fundamentalism, with particular focus on the “deprivatization of modern religion.” Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

RELI 143. Topics in Performing Religion (4)
This course explores religion as a system of bodily practices, rather than one of tenets or beliefs. How do day-to-day activities as well as significant rituals express and inform people’s religious lives? Why is doctrine an insufficient basis for understanding religion? May be taken up to three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

RELI 144. Devils and Demons in Christianity (4)
Christianity frequently finds definition in contradistinction to an “Other” characterized as immoral, irrational, and malevolent. This class investigates how devils and demons as constructions of the “Other” have contributed to Christianity’s growth and identity formation throughout history. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

RELI 145. Communication, Technology, and Religion (4)
This course will look at the relationship between information communication technologies (ICTs) and religion and how they have intersected or diverged in the course of history. We will look at both older and newer media, such as telegraph, radio, television, cassette tapes, internet, and satellite, and how they have been used by groups like Evangelical, Catholic, or Islamist movements in proliferation and transformation of ideas, rituals, ideologies, values, and diverse forms of sociability. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

RELI 146. Topics in the Religions of Antiquity (4)
Topical studies in the religious beliefs, practices, and institutions of pre-Christian Europe and near East. May be repeated for credit up to three times when topics vary. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

RELI 147. Pagan Europe and Its Christian Aftermath (4)
This course explores the history of how western Europe was converted from its indigenous pagan religions to the imported religion we know as Christianity. We will discuss conversion by choice and by force, partial or blended conversions, and the relationships between belief and culture. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

RELI 148. Religion and Women’s Activisms (4)
The course surveys women’s formal and informal roles and activities in a number of faiths, examining how women’s agency and activism may be constrained or fostered by religious ideologies and norms in various historical and political contexts. Examples are drawn from a range of male-centered religions (Islam, Judaism, Christianity, Buddhism), woman-centered religions (Sande, Afro-Brazilian, Z-ar Cult), and newly formed theologies (Womanist, Native American, and Mujerista; New Age feminist spiritualities). Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

RELI 149. Islam in America (4)
This course introduces the students to historical and social developments of Islam in the United States. Tracing Islam back to the African slaves, the course examines various Muslim communities in the United States, with a focus on African American Muslims, especially Malcolm X. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

RELI 150. Religion and Cinema (4)
The course is an introductory study of cinema and religion. It explores how cinema depicts religion and spiritual experience. A number of films will be studied to understand how cinematic and religious narratives and practices overlap and, at times, diverge in complex ways. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

RELI 151. Deep Ecology: Knowing Place (4)
This course explores intersections between religious discourse and ecological discourse by considering texts from both that treat the human world as irreducibly interconnected with more-than-human worlds of nature and “spirit.” Themes include the ambivalence of wildness; the critique of anthropocentrism (human-centeredness); and the question of how religious emphasis on “knowing (one’s) place” can create a sense of either human exceptionality, above nature, or embeddedness, within nature. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

RELI 153. Hispanic American Religions (4)
This course introduces students to historical and social developments of religion among Hispanic Americans. The course examines changing religious traditions and ritual practices among Hispanic Americans with a focus on Catholicism and (evangelical) Protestantism. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

RELI 154. Asian American Religions (4)
This course introduces students to historical and social developments of religion among Asian Americans. Tracing back to the mid-nineteenth century, the course examines changing religious traditions and ritual practices among Asian American communities. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

RELI 155. African American Religions (4)
This course introduces students to historical and social developments of religion among African Americans. The course examines changing religious traditions and ritual practices among African Americans since slavery to the present era. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

RELI 156. Posthuman Spirituality (4)
This course will survey questions surrounding the “coevolution” of human and technics and ways such processes are making new worlds of which we often feel a sense of perpetual disruption. We investigate posthuman not only in terms of new technological practices but spiritual experiences that bring about new understandings of being human in the world. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

RELI 157GS. Religion in Japan (4)
This course examines Japanese religions by studying various traditions including Buddhism, Christianity, and Shintoism and their influence on Japanese culture such as anime and cinema. Students must apply and be accepted into the Global Seminar Program.

RELI 158GS. Japanese Literature and Spirituality (4)
This course looks at the relationship between literature and spirituality in Japan. The course explores this relationship in the works of Shusaku Endo, Hiromi Ito, Yasunari Kawabata, Haruki Murakami, and others. Students must apply and be accepted into the Global Seminar Program.

RELI 159GS. Native Religions (4)
This course explores Native American ways of life and religions; it also examines the impact of European invasion and colonization. Prerequisites: Students must apply and be accepted into the Global Seminar Program. Program or material fee may apply.

RELI 160GS. Religion and Politics (4)
Explores the complex relationship between religion and politics in a variety of historical and social contexts. The course examines a range of texts and case studies with a focus on the intersection of religion with politics. Prerequisites: Students must apply and be accepted into the Global Seminar Program. Program or material fee may apply.

RELI 188. Special Topics in Religion (4)
Students in this lecture will investigate important problems in the study of religion or the history of particular religions. RELI 188 and RELI 188GS may be taken for credit for a combined total of three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

RELI 188GS. Special Topics in Religion (4)
Students in this course will investigate important problems in the study of religion or the history of particular religions. Department approval required. Students must apply for and be accepted into the Global Seminars Program. RELI 188GS and RELI 188 may be taken for credit for a combined total of three times. Program or materials fees may apply.

RELI 189. Seminar in Religion (4)
This seminar requires the intensive analysis of critical problems in the study of religion or the history of particular religions. May be repeated for credit up to three times when topics vary. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; RELI 101 or consent of instructor.

RELI 192. Senior Seminar in Religion (1)
The senior seminar is designed to allow senior undergraduates to meet with faculty members in a small group setting to explore an intellectual topic in religion at the upper-division level. Topics will vary from quarter to quarter. Senior seminars may be taken for credit up to four times, with a change in topic and permission of the department. Enrollment is limited to twenty students, with preference given to seniors.

RELI 196AH. Honors Thesis in Religion (4)
First quarter of a two-quarter sequence of individualized, directed-research courses for majors in which students learn firsthand the processes and practices of scholarly research in the study of religion, culminating in the completion of a thesis and an oral presentation. Students may not receive credit for both RELI 196H and RELI 196AH. Prerequisites: RELI 101 (may be completed concurrently with the honors sequence). Department approval required for entry into the Honors Program.

RELI 196BH. Honors Thesis in Religion (4)
Second quarter of a two-quarter sequence of individualized, directed-research courses for majors in which students learn firsthand the processes and practices of scholarly research in the study of religion, culminating in the completion of a thesis and an oral presentation. Students may not receive credit for both RELI 196H and RELI 196BH. Prerequisites: RELI 196A. Department approval required for continuing participation in the Honors Program.

RELI 197. Directed Advanced Readings (4)
A faculty member will direct a student in advanced readings on a topic not generally included in the Program for the Study of Religion’s curriculum. Students must make arrangements with the program and individual faculty. May be repeated for credit up to three times for credit. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; RELI 110A or 110B; overall GPA of 2.5.

RELI 199. Independent Research Study for Undergraduates (2–4)
Independent research in religion under the supervision of a faculty member affiliated with the Program for the Study of Religion. This course may be repeated three times with program approval. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: upper-division standing, with 2.5 GPA (overall); program stamp

REV 1. First Year Experience (2)
This course facilitates academic success at a leading research university by helping students understand and embrace academic and cocurricular expectations, engage and map cocurricular opportunities, and strengthen critical thinking and organizational, interpersonal, and wellness skills. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: open to Revelle College first-year students only. (F)

REV 2. Transfer Year Experience (2)
This course facilitates academic success at a leading research university by helping students understand and embrace academic and curricular expectations, engage and map cocurricular opportunities, and strengthen critical thinking and organizational, interpersonal, and wellness skills. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: open to Revelle College transfer students only. (F)

REV 12. Practicing the Science of Mindfulness (1)
Weekly seminars with a faculty member for Revelle undergraduates interested in the science of mindfulness and how to use it for stress management, interpersonal skills, performance improvement, and to increase the sense of well-being. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: open to Revelle undergraduate students only. (S)

REV 16. Leadership in Practice (1)
This weekly class is for all Revelle undergraduate levels seeking to connect leadership theory to practice while exploring how leadership can be exercised in classrooms, communities, and a variety of career pathways. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: enrollment limited to Revelle College students. (W)

REV 20. Revelle First-year Student Honors Program Seminar (0)
Weekly seminars with a faculty member (chosen each year by the provost to match the interests of participating students). This seminar will acquaint students coming from high schools (first-year students) with the scholarship and research being conducted by faculty and instill in students a sense of participation in the scholarly life at UC San Diego. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: by invitation only. (F,W,S)

REV 87. First-Year Student Seminar (1)
The First-year Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year seminars can be offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students.

REV 88. Succeeding in Scientific Research (1)
This course will evaluate strategies used to select impactful topics and research questions, how to turn curiosity into knowledge by posing effective hypotheses. Practical topics—how to design an experiment, how to make effective arguments in written/spoken forms of scientific communication. P/NP grades only. (S)

REV 99H. Independent Study (1)
Independent study or research under direction of a member of the faculty. Prerequisites: first-year class standing. Students must have been offered a Regents Scholarship. Special Studies preauthorization required. (F,W,S)

REV 110H. Revelle College Senior Honors Seminar (1)
A seminar for senior honors students concerning the nature of science, applied science, and social sciences. The course will consist of readings and discussion concerning a range of historical, philosophical, and sociological perspectives. Prerequisites: students who meet honors criteria will be invited to enroll.

SIO 1. The Planets (4)
Space exploration has revealed an astonishing diversity among the planets and moons in our solar system. The planets and their histories will be compared to gain insight and a new perspective on planet Earth. Prerequisites: none.

SIO 3. Life in the Oceans (4)
An introduction to the wide variety of organisms that live in the oceans, the habitats they occupy, and how species interact with each other and their environment. Included will be examinations of adaptations, behavior, ecology, and a discussion of local and global resource management and conservation issues. This course is designed for nonbiology majors. Prerequisites: none.

SIO 10. The Earth (4)
An introduction to structure of the Earth and the processes that form and modify it. Emphasizes material that is useful for understanding geological events as reported in the news and for making intelligent decisions regarding the future of our environment. Prerequisites: none.

SIO 10GS. The Earth (In Iceland) (4)
This Global Seminar course will provide an introduction to planet Earth and the processes that shape it. Topics to be covered include Earth layers, materials, plate tectonics, weathering and erosion, and coastal processes. The geology of Iceland will be a specific emphasis and will thus be used as a lens through which to learn about the Earth. Program or material fee may apply. Prerequisites: students must apply and be accepted to the Global Seminars Program.

SIO 12. History of the Earth and Evolution (4)
Evolution of the Earth from its origin in the early solar system to formation of continents and ocean basins, and how the planet became habitable. It examines the geologic record of evolution, extinction, plate tectonics, and climate changes through time. Prerequisites: none.

SIO 15. Natural Disasters (4)
Introduction to environmental perils and their impact on everyday life. Geological and meteorological processes, including earthquakes, volcanic activity, large storms, global climate change, mass extinctions throughout Earth’s history, and human activity that causes and prevents natural disasters. Prerequisites: none.

SIO 16. Geology of the National Parks (4)
An introduction to fundamental concepts of geology and environmental science through the lens of the national park system. Topics covered include the geologic time scale; plate tectonics; igneous, metamorphic, and sedimentary processes; geomorphology; climate change; and environmental degradation. Prerequisites: none.

SIO 20. The Atmosphere (4)
Descriptive introduction to meteorology and climate studies. Topics include global and wind and precipitation patterns, weather forecasting, present climate and past climate changes (including droughts, El Niño events), greenhouse gas effects, ozone destruction, the “little ice age,” acid rain. Prerequisites: none.

SIO 25. Climate Change and Society (4)
Climate change is one of the most complex and critical issues affecting societies today. This course will present the scientific evidence for climate change and its impacts and consider governmental policy responses and possible adaptation strategies. Prerequisites: none.

SIO 30. The Oceans (4)
Presents modern ideas and descriptions of the physical, chemical, biological, and geological aspects of oceanography, and considers the interactions between these aspects. Intended for students interested in the oceans, but who do not necessarily intend to become professional scientists. Prerequisites: none.

SIO 35. Water (4)
This course will examine the properties of water that make it unique and vital to living things. Origin of water on Earth and neighboring planets will be explored. Socially relevant issues concerning water use and contamination will be covered. Prerequisites: none.

SIO 40. Life and Climate on Earth (4)
Explores life on Earth and its relationship to the environment—past, present, and future. Topics include origins of life, earth history, elemental cycles, global climate variability and human impacts on our environment. Prerequisites: none.

SIO 45. Volcanoes (4)
This class will provide students with an introduction to volcanoes, including the mechanisms, products, and hazards associated with various types of volcanic eruptions. A key area of emphasis will be the impact of volcanism on human societies. Prerequisites: none.

SIO 45GS. Volcanoes (4)
This class will provide students with an introduction to volcanoes, including the mechanisms, products, and hazards associated with various types of volcanic eruptions. A key area of emphasis will be the impact of volcanism on human societies. Prerequisites: students must apply for and be accepted to the Global Seminars Program.

SIO 46GS. Global Volcanism (4)
This global seminar course will focus on European volcanism—past, present, and future. Students will learn in detail about the volcanoes of Europe, including their geologic origins, eruptive styles, and histories. A special focus will be on the impact of volcanic hazards on the people, cultures, and societies of this heavily populated region. Notable volcanoes and historical eruptions (Vesuvius and Pompeii, Mt. Etna, Santorini, Campi Flegrei) will be discussed in detail. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: students must apply for and be accepted to the Global Seminars Program.

SIO 50. Introduction to Physical Geology (6)
This course is an introduction to how our planet works, focusing on the formation and evolution of the solid earth, and the processes affecting both its surface and interior. Laboratories and substantial field component complement and extend the lecture material. Program and/or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: none.

SIO 60. Experiences in Oceanic and Atmospheric Sciences (4)
Oceanic and atmospheric sciences are introduced through a series of modules where students learn basic principles in the classroom and then have hands-on experiences demonstrating these principles. The course will include trips to the beach, the Ellen Browning Scripps Memorial Pier, and laboratories at Scripps Institution of Oceanography. Prerequisites: none.

SIO 65. Geosciences Seminar (2)
This seminar introduces students to the field of geoscience and to the concentration options within the geosciences major. During the seminar, students will explore options for study, career opportunities, and contemporary topics while building relationships with their peers in the cohort. Presentations and talks will feature a variety of subjects, including discussions by industry experts. Prerequisites: none. (P/NP grades only).

SIO 75. Geological History of Earth (4)
An introduction to geologic time and the history of the Earth. Topics include physical, biological, and climate history of Earth, measurement of geologic time, formation of major Earth features, change in the Earth system, and North American geology. Prerequisites: SIO 50 or consent of instructor.

SIO 87. First-year Seminar (1)
The First-year Seminar Program is designed to provide the new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small setting. First-year seminars can be offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students. Students may complete up to four first-year seminars with the stipulation that none of the seminars are repeated. (P/NP grades only).

SIO 90. Undergraduate Seminar (1)
Perspectives on ocean sciences. This seminar introduces students to exciting and current research topics in ocean science as presented by faculty and researchers at Scripps Institution of Oceanography. Formerly ERTH 90. Prerequisites: none.

SIO 96. Frontiers in the Earth Sciences (2)
An introduction to current research in the earth sciences. Background in science not required but may be useful for some topics. Areas covered vary from year to year. Prerequisites: none.

SIO 99. Independent Study with Scripps Institute of Oceanography (2 or 4)
Independent reading or research on a problem by special arrangement with a faculty member. Prerequisites: lower-division standing, completion of thirty units of UC San Diego undergraduate study, a minimum UC San Diego GPA of 3.0, and a completed and approved Special Studies form, UC San Diego Application for Enrollment Special Studies Courses 97, 98, 99.

SIO 100. Geological Field Methods (4)
Mapping and interpretation of geologic units. Fieldwork is done locally, and the data are analyzed in the laboratory. There will be one mandatory weekend field trip to Anza Borrego State Park. Program and/or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: SIO 50 or consent of instructor.

SIO 101. California Coastal Oceanography (4)
This course emphasizes oceanographic connections between physical and climate forcing and marine ecosystem responses using examples from and activities in the California coastal environment. The approach is inquiry-based, combining classroom and experiential learning to build critical and quantitative thinking and research insights and abilities. Prerequisites: CHEM 6A or consent of instructor.

SIO 102. Introduction to Geochemistry (4)
An introduction to the chemical composition and evolution of the Earth and solar system. Applications of chemical methods to elucidate the origin and geologic history of the Earth and the planets, evolution of oceans and atmosphere, and human environmental impacts. Prerequisites: SIO 50, CHEM 6A-B-C, or consent of instructor.

SIO 103. Introduction to Geophysics (4)
An introduction to the structure and composition of the solid earth. Topics include seismology, the gravity and magnetic fields, high-pressure geophysics, and concepts in geodynamics. Emphasis is on global geophysics, i.e., on the structure and evolution of the planet. Prerequisites: MATH 20C or MATH 31BH, and PHYS 2C, and SIO 50, or consent of instructor. SIO 160 recommended.

SIO 104/SIOG 255. Paleobiology and History of Life (6)
An introduction to the major biological transitions in Earth history from the origins of metabolism and cells to the evolution of complex societies. The nature and limitations of the fossil record, patterns of adaptation and diversity, and the tempo and mode of biological evolution. Laboratories and substantial field component complement and extend the lecture material. Program and/or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: undergraduate: BILD 3 or consent of instructor. Graduate: graduate-level standing or consent of instructor. Graduate students, additionally, will give oral presentation or research paper.

SIO 105. Sedimentology and Stratigraphy (4)
This course will examine sedimentary environments from mountain tops to the deep sea across a variety of time scales. The focus is to develop the skills to interpret stratigraphy and read the history of the Earth that it records. Laboratories and substantial field component complement and extend lecture material. Program and/or course materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: SIO 50 or consent of instructor.

SIO 106. Introduction to Hydrogeology (4)
An introduction to the theory and practice of hydrogeology, emphasizing current concepts of aquifer and water properties and practical considerations related to groundwater quality, groundwater flow, and sustainability of groundwater reservoirs. Prerequisites: SIO 50, MATH 20C, PHYS 2C, and CHEM 6C; upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

SIO 107. Water Pollution (4)
This course covers the principles of water pollution and water pollution issues on local, regional, and global scales. It introduces and builds upon an understanding of basic chemical, physical, and biological properties of water and water contaminants, including hydrological and marine biogeochemical considerations. Case studies selected and researched by students will guide discussions. Prerequisites: (CHEM 6B or 6BH) and (BILD 3 or SIO 50 or SIO 60)

SIO 108. Paleoclimatology (4)
An introduction to basic principles and applications of paleoclimatology, the study of climate and climate changes that occurred prior to the period of instrumental records. A review of processes and archives of climate data will be investigated using examples from Earth history. Prerequisites: ESYS 102 or SIO 50 or SIO 12 or consent of instructor.

SIO 109. Bending the Curve: Climate Change Solutions (4)
(Cross-listed with POLI 117). This course will focus on scalable solutions for carbon neutrality and climate stability. The course adopts climate change mitigation policies, technologies, governance, and actions that California, the UC system, and cities around the world have adopted as living laboratories and challenges students to identify locally and globally scalable solutions. Students may only receive credit for one of the following: POLI 117, POLI 117R, SIO 109, or SIO 109R.

SIO 109R. Bending the Curve Online: Climate Change Solutions (4)
(Cross-listed with POLI 117R). This online course focuses on developing urgent climate change solutions that integrate technology, policy and governance, finance, land-use, and social/educational dimensions. Students may only receive credit for one of the following: POLI 117, POLI 117R, SIO 109, or SIO 109R.

SIO 110. Introduction to GIS and GPS for Scientists (4)
A hands-on introduction to science applications of geographic information systems and global positioning system. Students acquire data through GPS field surveys, design and construct GIS using ESRI’s ArcGIS software, analyze spatial data, and present the results in a web-based environment. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

SIO 111. Introduction to Ocean Waves (4)
The linear theory of ocean surface waves, including group velocity, wave dispersion, ray theory, wave measurement and prediction, shoaling waves, giant waves, ship wakes, tsunamis, and the physics of the surf zone. Cross-listed with PHYS 111. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A–C or PHYS 4A–C and MATH 20A–E, or consent of instructor.

SIO 112. Computational Tools and Data Science in Geophysics (4)
This course covers a range of computational tools and data science techniques and their uses in geophysics. Topics include linear algebra (linear and iterative solvers, eigenvalue problems and least squares), random variables and “hands on” probability, Kalman filtering, Markov chain Monte Carlo, and machine learning methods (Gaussian process regression and deep neural networks). Geophysical inverse problems are the main focus of application. This course involves regular coding assignments. Recommended preparation: SIO 113 and prior familiarity with computer programming and linear algebra. Prerequisites: SIO 103 or consent of instructor.

SIO 113. Computing and Data Analysis in Geosciences (4)
Computers are used in the geosciences to understand complex natural systems. This course includes beginning programming with a user-friendly language (Python). Prerequisites: SIO 50 or consent of instructor.

SIO 114. The Science and Analysis of Environmental Justice (4)
Introduction to the scientific basis and critical analysis of environmental justice, with an emphasis on case studies, activism, and community engagement. This course will prepare students to critique and develop scientific models, research designs, and measurements consistent with environmental justice. Students may not receive credit for ETHN 136 and SIO 114. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

SIO 115. Ice and the Climate System (4)
This course examines the Earth’s cryosphere, including glaciers, ice sheets, ice caps, sea ice, lake ice, river ice, snow, and permafrost. We cover the important role of the cryosphere in the climate systems and its response to climate change. Prerequisites: MATH 20C or MATH 31BH, and PHYS 2C, or consent of instructor.

SIO 116. Climate Change and Global Health: Understanding the Mechanisms (4)
This course will introduce students to the public health effects of global climate change. The course will begin by understanding the climate change phenomena and explaining the direct and indirect links between climate change and human health, including the public health impacts of infectious diseases, atmospheric air pollution, and extreme weather events. The second part of the course will be dedicated to adaption and mitigation solutions with a particular focus on vulnerable populations. Students may not receive credit for SIO 116 and SIO 116GS. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

SIO 116GS. Climate Change and Global Health: Understanding the Mechanisms (4)
This course will introduce students to the public health effects of global climate change. The course will begin by understanding the climate change phenomena and explaining the direct and indirect links between climate change and human health, including the public health impacts of infectious diseases, atmospheric air pollution, and extreme weather events. The second part of the course will be dedicated to adaption and mitigation solutions with a particular focus on vulnerable populations. Students may not receive credit for SIO 116GS and SIO 116. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: students must apply for and be accepted to the Global Seminars Program.

SIO 117. The Physical Basis of Global Warming (4)
Introduction to the processes behind global warming, including the physics of the greenhouse effect, controls on greenhouse gases, atmospheric and oceanic circulation, climate feedbacks, relationship to natural climate variability, and global environmental issues related to global warming. Prerequisites: MATH 20D and PHYS 2C or consent of instructor.

SIO 118GS. Responding to Climate Change: Possible Solutions (4)
This course will be taught in Dharamsala, India, and explores societal solutions to climate change. Course topics include mitigation and adaptation policies, including a guide to design, implement, and evaluate an adaptation policy, and the public health cobenefits of addressing climate change. Prerequisites: students must apply for and be accepted to the Global Seminars Program.

SIO 119. Physics and Chemistry of the Oceans (4)
Basic physical and chemical processes that influence the biology of the oceans, such as ocean circulation, ocean acidification, carbonate chemistry, trace metal chemistry. Prerequisites: PHYS 1C or 2C, CHEM 6C, or consent of instructor.

SIO 120. Mineralogy (4)
Application of mineralogical and X-ray crystallographic techniques in earth sciences. Topics include symmetry, crystal structure, chemical, and physical properties of minerals with special emphasis on the common rock-forming minerals. Laboratory component includes polarizing microscope and X-ray powder diffraction methods. Prerequisites: SIO 50, or consent of instructor.

SIO 121. Biology of the Cryosphere (4)
The cryosphere comprises sea ice, glaciers, snow, and other frozen environments. Changing rapidly in the face of global climate change, these environments host unique and highly adapted ecosystems that play an important role in the global earth system. In this course we will explore the physiology and ecology of organisms in the cryosphere and peripheral habitats. A special emphasis will be placed on sea ice as a habitat archetype, but glacier, snow, and permafrost will also be covered. Prerequisites: BILD 1, BILD 2, BILD 3, or consent of instructor.

SIO 121GS. Geology of the Alps (4)
This global seminar course will examine the geology of the Alps range. Students will develop an in-depth understanding of the geology, tectonics, and geomorphology of this fascinating, beautiful, and geologically complex region. The course will focus closely on the tectonics of the region and the subsequent geologic processes that have shaped it (e.g., glaciation) since the late Mesozoic Alpine Orogeny. Classroom study will be strongly augmented with local and regional field excursions. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: SIO 10 or SIO 50. Students must apply for and be accepted to the Global Seminars Program.

SIO 122. Ecological Developmental Biology (4)
This course will explore the rapidly expanding field of ecological developmental biology which focuses on how factors such as temperature, nutrition, microbes, predators, and hormones influence development epigenetically. Emphasis will be given to the genetic basis of responses to the environment, drawn from studies in aquatic and terrestrial animals and plants. Topics include phenotypic plasticity, teratogenesis, symbiosis, endocrine disruptors, sex determination, and genetic assimilation. Recommended preparation: BICD 100. Prerequisites: BILD 3, or consent of instructor.

SIO 123. Microbial Environmental Systems Biology (4)
Environmental systems biology is the study of the genomic basis for patterns of microbial diversity and adaptation in relation to habitat. This course introduces the microbial genome as a unit of study and surveys introductory principles in microbial genomics and bioinformatics that underlie a range of contemporary research in diverse marine habitats, such as the deep sea and polar regions, as well as studies of biomedical importance, including the human microbiome. Prerequisites: BICD 100 or BICD 100R or consent of instructor.

SIO 124. Marine Natural Products (4)
This course will provide a detailed introduction to marine natural products. It will survey the organisms that produce these compounds and introduce how they are made (biosynthesis), isolated and identified (natural products chemistry), why they are made (chemical ecology), and how they are exploited for useful purposes including drug discovery (marine biotechnology). It will leave students with a fundamental understanding of the latest techniques employed in natural product research. Prerequisites: CHEM 6C and BILD 1 or BILD 3 or consent of instructor.

SIO 125. Biomechanics of Marine Life (4)
An introduction to the physical basis of the biological world. This course explores how the physical principles of solids and fluids underlay the functional morphology, ecology, and adaptations of all living things, with emphasis on marine organisms. Prerequisites: BILD 3 and PHYS 1C or PHYS 2C, or consent of instructor.

SIO 126. Marine Microbiology (4)
The role of microorganisms in the oceans; metabolic diversity; methods in marine microbiology; interactions of microbes with other microbes, plants and animals; biochemical cycling, pollution and water quality; microbe-mineral interactions; extremophiles. Prerequisites: BILD 1 or consent of instructor.

SIO 127. Marine Molecular Ecology (4)
This course will survey the application of molecular methods to address diverse questions concerning the ecology and evolutionary biology in marine organisms. Focus will be on genetic and genomic approaches that are providing new insights into how marine organisms adapt to their physical and biotic environments. Prerequisites: BILD 3 and BICD 100 or BICD 100R, or consent of instructor.

SIO 128. Microbial Life in Extreme Environments (4)
Microorganisms turn up in the strangest places. This course examines the exotic and bizarre in the microbial world, including the super-sized, the rock and cloud builders, the survivors, and those present at the limits of life. Prerequisites: BILD 1 or BILD 2 or BILD 3, or consent of instructor.

SIO 129. Marine Chemical Ecology (4)
This class explores the chemistry of marine life involved in the chemical adaptations of defense and communication. The class examines all of the marine taxa from microbes to higher plants and animals. Prerequisites: CHEM 140C or consent of instructor.

SIO 130. Scientific Diving (4)
This course includes theoretical and practical training to meet Scripps Institution of Oceanography and AAUS standards for scientific diving authorization and involves classroom, field, and ocean skin and scuba diving sessions. Topics include scientific diving programs and policy; physics and physiology of diving; decompression theory; dive planning; navigation; search and recovery; equipment and environmental considerations; subtidal sampling techniques; hazardous marine life; diving first aid; and diver rescue. Please see course preparation requirements here: https://scripps.ucsd.edu/scientific-diving-program/authorization-training. P/NP grades only. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: department approval required.

SIO 131. Parasitology (6)
An ecological approach to parasitology. Students will gain the intellectual and practical foundation required to undertake parasitological research. Lectures will cover ecological/evolutionary concepts and the biology of various parasitic taxa. In labs, students will learn how to survey hosts for parasites, collect and identify parasites, perform infection experiments, and collect and analyze data. Students will also develop scholarship skills by delving into the scientific literature. Prerequisites: BILD 3 and BILD 2 or SIO 183 or SIO 184 or SIO 188, or consent of instructor.

SIO 132. Introduction to Marine Biology (4)
Overview of marine organisms and their adaptations to sea life. Selected examples of physiological, behavioral, and evolutionary adaptations in response to the unique challenges of a maritime environment. Prerequisites: BILD 3 or consent of instructor.

SIO 133. Marine Mammal Biology (4)
Introduction to the biology, ecology, evolution, and conservation status of marine mammals. Description of marine mammal taxa (mysticetes, odontocetes, pinnipeds, sirenians), their anatomy, physiology, ecology, and behavior. Impacts of whaling, fisheries interactions, and other anthropogenic threats. Prerequisites: BILD 3 and upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

SIO 134. Introduction to Biological Oceanography (4)
Basics for understanding the ecology of marine communities. The approach is process-oriented, focusing on major functional groups of organisms, their food-web interactions and community response to environmental forcing, and contemporary issues in human and climate influences. (Students may not receive credit for both SIO 134 and BIEB 134.) Prerequisites: BILD 3 and upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

SIO 135/SIOG 236. Satellite Remote Sensing (4)
Satellite remote sensing provides global observations of Earth to monitor environmental changes in land, oceans, and ice. Overview, physical principles of remote sensing, including orbits, electromagnetic radiation, diffraction, electro-optical, and microwave systems. Weekly labs explore remote sensing data sets. Graduate students will also be required to write a term paper and do an oral presentation. Prerequisites: undergraduate: PHYS 2A-B or PHYS 4A-B-C, or consent of instructor. Graduate: graduate-level standing or consent of instructor.

SIO 136. Marine Biology Laboratory (6)
Introductory laboratory course in current principles and techniques applicable to research problems in marine biology. Field component includes introduction to intertidal, salt marsh, or other marine ecosystems. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: BILD 3, SIO 132, and SIO 134, or consent of instructor.

SIO 137. Ecosystems and Fisheries (4)
This course introduces students to the broad ecological processes and approaches that are fundamental to studying the dynamics of exploited populations, food webs, and ecosystems. The basics of fisheries oceanography are covered, with a synergistic focus on internations between key members of an ecosystem. A diversity of ecosystems will be discussed but the focus will be on the open ocean and deep sea. Prerequisites: SIO 134 or consent of instructor.

SIO 138. The Coral Reef Environment (4)
Assessment of the physical, chemical, and biological interactions that define the coral reef system; essential geography and evolutionary history of reefs; natural and human perturbations to the coral reef ecosystem; aspects of reef management and sustainability. Prerequisites: BILD 3, MATH 10A or MATH 20A, CHEM 6B, or consent of instructor.

SIO 139. Current Research in Marine Biology Colloquium (2)
Provides an introduction to current research topics and developments in marine biology and biological oceanography. Faculty members from Scripps Institution of Oceanography will offer perspectives in these areas. Students will practice scientific research and communication skills. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

SIO 141/CHEM 174. Chemical Principles of Marine Systems (4)
Introduction to the chemistry and distribution of the elements in seawater, emphasizing basic chemical principles such as electron structure, chemical bonding, and group and periodic properties and showing how these affect basic aqueous chemistry in marine systems. Prerequisites: CHEM 6C or 6CH, or consent of instructor.

SIO 143. Ocean Acidification (4)
This course covers the fundamentals of ocean acidification, including the chemical background; past and future changes in ocean chemistry; biological and biogeochemical consequences, including organism and ecosystem function; biodiversity; biomineralization; carbonate dissolution; and the cycling of carbon and nitrogen in the oceans. May be coscheduled with SIOG 264. Prerequisites: PHYS 1C or PHYS 2C and CHEM 6C or CHEM 6CH, or consent of instructor.

SIO 144/SIOG 252A. Introduction to Isotope Geochemistry (4)
Radioactive and stable isotope studies in geology and geochemistry, including geochronology, isotopes as tracers of magmatic processes, cosmic-ray produced isotopes as tracers in the crust and weathering cycle, isotopic evolution of the crust and mantle. Prerequisites: undergraduate: SIO 50, 102, and 120 or consent of instructor. Graduate: graduate-level standing or consent of instructor. Graduate level requires student presentation.

SIO 145. Introduction to Field Methods in Biological Oceanography (6)
Diverse biological communities of the open ocean drive marine biogeochemistry and food webs. This laboratory course introduces students to methods used to quantify biomass and consumption rates of organisms spanning phytoplankton to fishes. Laboratory and computational methods for analyzing biological samples are presented. Students receive hands-on, at-sea experience for sampling multiple levels of the pelagic food web, through active participation in two single-day oceanographic cruises. Prerequisites: SIO 134 or BIEB 134.

SIO 146. Methods in Cell and Developmental Biology of Marine Organisms Lab (6)
This laboratory course will introduce students to modern concepts and techniques in molecular, cellular, and developmental biology, through authentic research projects using echinoderm, mollusk, and coral species. In addition to designing and performing experiments, students will learn to evaluate data, work with DNA sequences, quantify results with statistics, prepare figures, read primary research literature, write and review scientific research articles, and give scientific presentations. Prerequisites: BILD 2 or consent of instructor.

SIO 147. Applications of Phylogenetics (6)
Overview of the computer-based methods for constructing phylogenetic trees using morphological and molecular data. Lectures and labs cover evolutionary and ecological transformations, biodiversity measurements, biogeography, systematic and taxonomy. An independent project and presentation are required. (Students may not receive credit for both SIO 147 and BIEB 147.) Prerequisites: BILD 3 or consent of instructor.

SIO 152. Petrology and Petrography (4)
Mineralogic, chemical, textural and structural properties of igneous, metamorphic, and sedimentary rocks; their origin and relations to evolution of the Earth’s crust and mantle. Laboratory emphasizes hand specimens and microscopic studies of rocks in thin sections. Prerequisites: SIO 50 and SIO 120 or consent of instructor.

SIO 153. Geomorphology (4)
Geomorphology is the study of the dynamic interface across which the atmosphere, water, biota, and tectonics interact to transform rock into landscapes with distinctive features crucial to the function and existence of water resources, natural hazards, climate, biogeochemical cycles, and life. In this class, we will study many of the Earth surface processes that operate on spatial scales from atomic particles to continents and over time scales of nanoseconds to millions of years. Prerequisites: SIO 50 or consent of instructor.

SIO 155. Whole Earth Geochemistry (4)
A geochemical overview of Earth materials and chemical processes involved in the Earth’s evolution. Topics include formation and differentiation of the Earth, linkages between the solid Earth and the atmosphere/hydrosphere, and isotope and trace element composition of igneous and metamorphic rocks. Prerequisites: SIO 102 or consent of instructor.

SIO 160. Introduction to Tectonics (4)
The theory of plate tectonics attempts to explain how forces within the Earth give rise to continents, ocean basins, mountain ranges, earthquake belts, and most volcanoes. In this course we will learn how plate tectonics works. Prerequisites: SIO 50 or consent of instructor.

SIO 161. Seismology (4)
Introduction to observational and theoretical seismology: earth structure, source representation, ray theory, and seismic wave phenomena. Examines stress and strain, the wave equation, travel times, amplitude and phase, surface waves, and source theory, including magnitude, focal mechanism, moment tensors, and radiation patterns. Prerequisites: MATH 20D or SIO 103.

SIO 162. Structural Geology (4)
Principles of stratigraphy and structural geology applicable to field geologic studies. Discussion and laboratory exercises. Two to three field trips required. Program and/or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: SIO 100 or consent of instructor.

SIO 164. Underwater Archaeology: From Atlantis to Science (4)
Underwater archaeology provides access to ancient environmental and cultural data concerning human adaptation to climate and environmental change. Provides an overview of methods, theories, and practice of marine archaeology including—environmental characteristics of coastal and underwater settings; the nature of ports, navigation, maritime culture, submerged landscapes, shipbuilding; methods of research in underwater settings; and legislative issues regarding underwater and coastal heritage. Students may not receive credit for both ANAR 164 and SIO 164.

SIO 166. Introduction to Environmental Archaeology—Theory and Method of Socioecodynamics and Human Paleoecology (4)
Introduction to the multidisciplinary tools for paleoenvironmental analysis—from ecology, sedimentology, climatology, zoology, botany, chemistry, and others—and provides the theory and method to investigate the dynamics between human behavior and natural processes. This socioecodynamic perspective facilitates a nuanced understanding of topics such as resource overexploitation, impacts on biodiversity, social vulnerability, sustainability, and responses to climate change. Students may not receive credit for ANAR 166 and SIO 166. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SIO 167. Geoarchaeology in Theory and Practice (6)
As specialists in human timescales, archaeologists are trained to identify subtle details that are often imperceptible for other geoscientists. This course is designed to train archaeologists to identify the natural processes affecting the archaeological record, and geoscientists to identify the influence of human behavior over land surfaces. The course, which includes lectures, laboratory training, and field observations, focuses on the articulation of sedimentology and human activity. Students may not receive credit for both ANAR 167 and SIO 167. Prerequisites: ANTH 3 and SIO 50 or consent of instructor.

SIO 170. Volcanology (4)
This class will introduce students to the fundamentals of the science of volcanology. Topics explored will include the processes and products of various types of volcanism, magma genesis, eruptive mechanisms, in addition to volcanic monitoring, hazards and mitigation. Students may not receive credit for both SIO 170 and SIO 170GS. Prerequisites: SIO 100 and CHEM 6A or CHEM 6AH, or consent of instructor.

SIO 170GS. Introduction to Volcanology (4)
This class will introduce students to the fundamentals of the science of volcanology. Topics explored will include the processes and products of various types of volcanism, magma genesis, eruptive mechanisms, in addition to volcanic monitoring, hazards, and mitigation. Students may not receive credit for both SIO 170 and SIO 170GS. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: Students must apply and be accepted to the Global Seminars Program.

SIO 170L. Introduction to Volcanology—Field Experience (1–4)
This course teaches fundamental aspects of physical and chemical volcanology through a one- to two-week field study experience prior to the start of the quarter. Subjects are introduced in lectures and reinforced and expanded upon in field exercises. Additional fees may be required for travel expenses. Program or materials fees may apply. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: SIO 170 or consent of instructor; department approval required.

SIO 171. Introduction to Physical Oceanography (4)
A physical description of the sea at the upper-division level, with emphasis on currents, waves, and turbulent motions that are observed in the ocean, and on the physics governing them. Prerequisites: MATH 20C and PHYS 2C or PHYS 4C, or consent of instructor.

SIO 172. Physics of the Atmosphere (4)
This course provides an understanding of the physical principles governing the behavior of the Earth’s atmosphere, with emphasis on the thermal structure and composition of the atmosphere, air masses and fronts, and atmospheric thermodynamics, fluid dynamics, and radiation. Prerequisites: MATH 20C and PHYS 2C, or consent of instructor.

SIO 173. Dynamics of the Atmosphere and Climate (4)
Introduction to the dynamical principles governing the atmosphere and climate using observations, numerical models, and theory to understand atmospheric circulation, weather systems, severe storms, marine layer, Santa Ana winds, El Niño, climate variability, and other phenomena. Prerequisites: MATH 20E and PHYS 2C, or consent of instructor.

SIO 174. Chemistry of the Atmosphere and Oceans (4)
An introduction to chemical compounds and their biogeochemical cycles in the oceans and atmosphere, with emphasis on climate issues like ocean acidification, greenhouse gases and the carbon cycle, other biogeochemical cycles, chlorofluorocarbons and the ozone hole, urban pollutants and their photochemistry, and aerosol particles and their effects on clouds. Prerequisites: CHEM 6C or CHEM 6CH and MATH 20C or MATH 31BH or consent of instructor.

SIO 175. Analysis of Oceanic and Atmospheric Data (4)
Oceanic and atmospheric observations produce large data sets whose understanding requires analysis using computers. This course will include an introduction to MATLAB for the purpose of analyzing data. Students will use modern data sets from the ocean and atmosphere to learn statistical data analysis. Prerequisites: MATH 18 or MATH 20F or MATH 31AH or consent of instructor.

SIO 176. Observational Physical Oceanography (4)
This course gives an introduction to the methods and measurements used by observational physical oceanographers. Topics covered include sensors such as conductivity-temperature-depth (CTD), acoustic Doppler current profiler (ADCP), platforms such as autonomous gliders and ships, and services such as satellite measurements. This course includes a research project. Prerequisites: SIO 171 or consent of instructor.

SIO 177. Fluid Dynamics (4)
This course gives an introduction to ocean and atmosphere fluid properties, statics, and kinematics; fluid conservation laws; irrotational flow; Bernoulli equation; gravity waves; shallow water equations; geophysical applications. Prerequisites: PHYS 2A and MATH 20D and MATH 20E or consent of instructor.

SIO 178. Geophysical Fluid Dynamics (4)
This course provides an introductory look at physical principles governing ocean currents and atmospheric flow. Topics may include large-scale circulation, ocean eddies, atmospheric storms systems, coastal upwelling, equatorial dynamics, and internal waves. Prerequisites: PHYS 2C and SIO 177 and MATH 18 or MATH 20F or MATH 31AH or consent of instructor.

SIO 179. Ocean Instruments and Sensors (4)
Apply modern and classic techniques for analysis of seawater, introducing concepts of signal transduction, calibration, and measurement quality control. Emphasis will be placed on computer automation to perform basic functions including instrument control, data storage, and on-the-fly calculations. Students will apply techniques from several branches of engineering to the marine sciences. Students may not receive credit for both SIO 179 and SIO 190 with the same subtitle. Recommended preparation: PHYS 2A-C or PHYS 4A-C. Prerequisites: CHEM 6A or CHEM 6AH or PHYS 2A or PHYS 4A or consent of instructor.

SIO 180. Communicating Science to Informal Audiences (4)
Students develop fundamental science communication and instructional skills through the understanding and application of learning theory, interpretive techniques, and pedagogical practices, which occur in the context of communicating ocean science concepts to a diverse audience at Birch Aquarium at Scripps. Prerequisites: CHEM 6A or SIO 50 or BILD 1 or consent of instructor.

SIO 181. Marine Biochemistry (4)
Biochemical mechanisms of adaptation in organisms to the marine environment. Special emphasis will be on the effects of pressure, temperature, salinity, oxygen, and light on the physiology and biochemistry. (Students may not receive credit for both SIO 181 and BIBC 130.) Prerequisites: none.

SIO 182. Environmental and Exploration Geophysics (4)
Theory and practice of nonseismic geophysics for groundwater, environmental, and exploration purposes. Lectures are supplemented by collection of gravity, magnetic, and resistivity data; data analysis; and report writing. Includes an introduction to MATLAB as a tool for geophysical data interpretation. Prerequisites: MATH 20D and PHYS 2C, or consent of instructor.

SIO 183. Phycology: Marine Plant Biology (6)
Lecture and laboratory course emphasizing the biology, ecology and taxonomy of marine plants and seaweeds. Laboratory work mainly involves examination, slide preparation and dissection of fresh material collected locally. An oral presentation on a current research topic is required. Program or course fee may apply. Prerequisites: BILD 3 or consent of instructor.

SIO 184. Marine Invertebrates (6)
Course emphasizing the diversity, evolution and functional morphology of marine invertebrates. Laboratory work involves examination of live and prepared specimens. An oral presentation and a paper on current research topic are required. Program or course fee may apply. Prerequisites: BILD 3 or consent of instructor.

SIO 185. Marine Microbiology Laboratory (5)
Techniques and theory in marine microbiology. Students perform experiments concerning (a) enrichment, enumeration, and identification, and (b) metabolic and physiochemical adaptations, along with an independent project. Students may not receive credit for both SIO 126L and SIO 185. Prerequisites: BILD 1 and SIO 132 or SIO 134 or consent of instructor.

SIO 186. Microbiomes across Environments (4)
This course is a comprehensive introduction to microbiome research, tools, and approaches for investigation, and a lexicon for understanding the biological role of microbial communities in the environment and in their hosts. Informational and instructive lectures will provide background and the latest in microbiome analysis, as well as experimental design, molecular biology, statistics, bioinformatics, and presentation and manuscript writing. Students will design and carry out their own experiment. Prerequisites: BILD 4 or SIO 187, and MATH 11 or SIO 187, or consent of instructor.

SIO 187. Statistical Methods in Marine Biology (4)
Introduction to statistical inference. Emphasis on constructing statistics for specific problems in marine biology. Topics include probability, distributions, sampling, replication, and experimental design. Students may not receive credit for both SIO 187 and BIEB 100. Prerequisites: BILD 3 or consent of instructor.

SIO 188. Biology of Fishes (5)
The comparative evolution, morphology, physiology, and ecology of fishes. Special emphasis on local, deep-sea, and pelagic forms in laboratory. Prerequisites: BILD 3 or consent of instructor.

SIO 189. Pollution, Environment and Health (4)
The goal is to understand the scope of the pollution problem facing the planet. Students will learn the properties of chemicals in the environment and survey the biological mechanisms that determine their accumulation and toxicity. Prerequisites: CHEM 6C and BILD 1 or 3 or consent of instructor.

SIO 190. Special Topics in Earth, Oceans, and Atmosphere (4)
A seminar course designed to treat emerging or topical subjects in the earth, ocean, or atmospheric sciences. Involves lectures, reading from the literature, and student participation in discussion. Topics vary from year to year. May be taken for credit two times. Enrollment by consent of instructor. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

SIO 190L. Special Topics in Earth, Oceans, and Atmosphere—Lab (4—6)
A lab course designed to treat emerging or topical subjects in the earth, ocean, or atmospheric sciences. Involves lectures, lab work, reading from the literature, and student participation in discussion. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

SIO 192. Senior Seminar in Scripps Institution of Oceanography (1)
The Senior Seminar Program is designed to allow Scripps Institution of Oceanography senior undergraduates to meet with faculty members in a small group setting to explore an intellectual topic in Scripps Oceanography (at the upper-division level). Topics will vary from quarter to quarter. Senior Seminars may be taken for credit up to four times, with a change in topic, and permission of the department. Enrollment is limited to twenty students, with preference given to seniors.

SIO 194. Research Seminar in Washington, DC (4)
Course attached to a six- to eight-unit internship taken by students participating in the UCDC Program. Involves weekly seminar meetings with faculty and teaching assistant and a substantial research paper. Prerequisites: department approval. Participation in the UCDC Program during quarter enrolled in seminar.

SIO 195. Methods of Teaching Earth Sciences (4)
Introduction to teaching earth sciences class section in a lower-division class, hold office hours, assist with examinations. This course counts only once toward the major. Prerequisites: junior or senior earth sciences major with GPA of 3.0 or an A in the course, overall GPA of 3.0 or higher, ninety units or more, and consent of instructor, plus department stamp.

SIO 196. Honors Thesis Research (4)
Course is for student participants in the senior honors thesis research program. Students complete individual research on a problem by special arrangement with, and under the direction of, a Scripps Institution of Oceanography faculty member. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: completed ninety units of courses, including twelve units of SIO courses. Achieved a GPA of 3.3 overall and 3.5 in SIO courses. Submitted to Scripps Steering Committee, and had approved, an honors thesis research proposal. Department stamp.

SIO 197. Earth Science Internship (2 or 4)
The earth science internship program is designed to complement the program’s academic curriculum with practical field experience. Prerequisites: completion of ninety units with a GPA of 2.5, and a completed and approved Special Studies form, UC San Diego Application for Enrollment Special Studies Courses 197, 198, 199, and department stamp.

SIO 197BA. Birch Aquarium Internship (4)
This internship will examine basic science learning theory and interpretive techniques best suited for learners in an aquarium or informal learning setting. Students will demonstrate learned skills by facilitating floor-based interactions and conducting visitor surveys that influence aquarium exhibit design and guest experiences. Interested students should contact the Scripps undergraduate office for application instructions. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and department stamp required.

SIO 198. Directed Group Study (2–4)
This course covers a variety of directed group studies in areas not covered by formal Scripps Oceanography courses. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

SIO 199. Independent Study for Undergraduates in Scripps Oceanography (4)
Independent reading or research on a problem. By special arrangement with a faculty member. (P/NP grades only.)

SEV 20. First-Year Honors Seminar (1)
This course introduces students to UC San Diego’s vibrant intellectual community through weekly seminars and field trips led by UC San Diego faculty and other invited speakers, who will discuss their path-breaking research and other exciting artistic and scientific endeavors taking place on campus and in the surrounding community. Prerequisites: department approval required. May be taken for credit up to three times.

SEV 195. Instructional Apprenticeship (4)
Students, under the direction of the instructor, lead discussion sections, attend lectures, and meet regularly with the instructor to help prepare course materials. Prerequisites: department approval required.

SXTH 1. First Year Experience (2)
This course facilitates academic success at a leading research university by helping students understand and embrace academic and curricular expectations, engage and map cocurricular opportunities, and strengthen critical thinking and organizational, interpersonal, and wellness skills. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: open to Sixth College NFRS only.

SXTH 2. Transfer Year Experience (2)
This course facilitates academic success at a leading research university by helping students understand and embrace academic and curricular expectations, engage and map cocurricular opportunities, and strengthen critical thinking and organizational, interpersonal, and wellness skills. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: open to Sixth College transfer students only.

SXTH 20. First-year Student Honors Seminar (1)
Weekly seminars with faculty members from a variety of disciplines (chosen by the provost to match the interests of participating students). This seminar provides students with opportunities to learn more about research and scholarly activities being conducted by faculty and instill in students a sense of participation in the scholarly life at UC San Diego. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: by invitation only.

SOCI 1. Introduction to Sociology (4)
An introduction to the organizing themes and ideas, empirical concerns, and analytical approaches of the discipline of sociology. The course focuses on both classical and contemporary views of modern society, on the nature of community, and on inequality, with special attention to class, race, and gender. Materials include both theoretical statements and case studies. Will not receive credit for SOCI 1 and SOCL 1A.

SOCI 2. The Study of Society (4)
A continuation of Sociology/L 1A. The focus here is on socialization processes, culture, social reproduction and social control, and collective action. As in 1A, materials include both theoretical statements and case studies. While 1B may be taken as an independent course, it is recommended that students take 1A and 1B in sequence, as the latter builds on the former. Will not receive credit for SOCI 2 and SOCL 1B.

SOCI 10. American Society: Social Structure and Culture in the U.S. (4)
An introduction to American society in historical, comparative, and contemporary perspectives. Topics will include American cultural traditions; industrialization; class structure; the welfare state; ethnic, racial, and gender relations; the changing position of religion; social movements; and political trends. Will not receive credit for SOCI 10 and SOCI 10R or SOCI 10 and SOCL 10.

SOCI 10R. American Society: Social Structure and Culture in the U.S. (4)
This fully online course is an introduction to American society in contemporary, historical, and comparative perspectives. Topics include American culture, inequality, poverty, the family, religion, the role of government, crime, social movements, and politics. Will not receive credit for SOCI 10R and SOCI 10 or SOCI 10R and SOCL 10.

SOCI 20. Social Change in the Modern World (4)
A survey of the major economic, political, and social forces that have shaped the contemporary world. The course will provide an introduction to theories of social change, as well as prepare the student for upper-division work in comparative-historical sociology. Will not receive credit for SOCI 20 and SOCL 20.

SOCI 30. Science, Technology, and Society (4)
A series of case studies of the relations between society and modern science, technology, and medicine. Global warming, reproductive medicine, AIDS, and other topical cases prompt students to view science-society interactions as problematic and complex. Will not receive credit for SOCI 30 and SOCL 30.

SOCI 40. Sociology of Health-Care Issues (4)
Designed as a broad introduction to medicine as a social institution and its relationship to other institutions as well as its relation to society. It will make use of both micro and macro sociological work in this area and introduce students to sociological perspectives of contemporary health-care issues. Will not receive credit for SOCI 40 and SOCL 40.

SOCI 50. Introduction to Law and Society (4)
Interrelationships between law and society, in the U.S. and other parts of the world. We examine law’s norms, customs, culture, and institutions, and explain the proliferation of lawyers in the U.S. and the expansion of legal “rights” worldwide. Will not receive credit for SOCI 50 and SOCL 50.

SOCI 60. The Practice of Social Research (4)
This course introduces students to the fundamental principles of the design of social research. It examines the key varieties of evidence, sampling methods, logic of comparison, and causal reasoning researchers use in their study of social issues. Will not receive credit for SOCI 60 and SOCL 60.

SOCI 70. General Sociology for Premedical Students (4)
This introductory course is specifically designed for premedical students and will provide them with a broad introduction to sociological concepts and research, particularly as applied to medicine.

SOCI 87. First-year Student Seminar in Sociology (1)
The First-year Student Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year student seminar topics will vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering first-year students.

SOCI 98. Directed Group Study in Sociology (4)
Small group study and research under the direction of an interested faculty member in an area not covered in regular sociology courses. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: lower-division standing; completion of thirty units of UC San Diego undergraduate study; minimum UC San Diego GPA of 3.0; completion and approval of Special Studies form. Consent of instructor and department approval required.

SOCI 99. Independent Study in Sociology (4)
Individual study and research under the direction of an interested faculty member. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: lower-division standing; completion of thirty units of UC San Diego undergraduate study; minimum UC San Diego GPA of 3.0; completion and approval of Special Studies form. Consent of instructor and department approval required.

SOCI 100. Classical Sociological Theory (4)
Major figures and schools in sociology from the early nineteenth century onwards, including Marx, Tocqueville, Durkheim, and Weber. The objective of the course is to provide students with a background in classical social theory, and to show its relevance to contemporary sociology. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 100 and SOCA 100.

SOCI 102. Network Data and Methods (4)
Social network analysts view society as a web of relationships rather than a mere aggregation of individuals. In this course, students will learn how to collect, analyze, and visualize social network data, as well as utilize these techniques to answer an original sociological research question. Prerequisites: SOCI 60 or CSS 2, and upper-division standing.

SOCI 103M. Computer Applications to Data Management in Sociology (4)
Develop skills in computer management and analysis of sociological data. Practical experience with data produced by sociological research. Students will develop competency in the analysis of sociological data, by extensive acquaintance with computer software used for data analysis and management (e.g., SPSS). Prerequisites: SOCI 60 or CSS 2, and upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 103M and SOCA 103M.

SOCI 104. Field Research: Methods of Participant Observation (4)
Relationship between sociological theory and field research. Strong emphasis on theory and methods of participant observation: consideration of problems of entry into field settings, recording observations, description/analysis of field data, ethical problems in fieldwork. Required paper using field methods. Prerequisites: SOCI 60 and upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 104 and SOCA 104.

SOCI 104Q. Qualitative Interviewing (4)
This course provides students with tools to conduct original research using qualitative interviews. Students will learn how to prepare, conduct, and analyze qualitative interviews. Special emphasis will be placed on the presentation of research in written form. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 104Q and SOCA 104Q.

SOCI 105. Ethnographic Film: Media Methods (6)
(Conjoined with SOCG 227.) Ethnographic recording of field data in written and audiovisual formats including film, video, and CD-ROM applications. Critical assessment of ethnographies and audiovisual ethnographic videotape. Prerequisites: graduate standing or consent of instructor for SOCG 227 and SOCI for SOCI 105. Will not receive credit for SOCI 105 and SOCA 105.

SOCI 106. Comparative and Historical Methods (4)
A broad-based consideration of the use of historical materials in sociological analysis, especially as this facilitates empirically oriented studies across different societies and through time, and their application in student research projects. Prerequisites: SOCI 60 and upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 106 and SOCA 106.

SOCI 106M. Holocaust Diaries (4)
Methods for interpreting diaries, letters, and testaments written by victims and perpetrators of the Holocaust. Students use these sources for original research about life in hiding, ghettos, and death camps. Includes techniques for making comparisons and for generalizing from evidence. Prerequisites: SOCI 60 and SOCI 178 or the consent of instructor. Will not receive credit for SOCI 106M and SOCA 106M.

SOCI 107. Epidemiological Methods: Statistical Study of Disease (4)
Epidemiology is the statistical study of disease, and epidemiological methods are a powerful tool for understanding the causes of certain diseases, e.g., AIDS, scurvy, cholera, and lung cancer. These fundamental epidemiological methods will be taught. Prerequisites: SOCI 60 and upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 107 and SOCA 107.

SOCI 108. Survey Research Design (4)
Translation of research goals into a research design, including probability sampling, questionnaire construction, data collection (including interviewing techniques), data processing, coding, and preliminary tabulation of data. Statistical methods of analysis will be limited primarily to percentaging. Prerequisites: SOCI 60 and upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 108 and SOCA 108.

SOCI 109. Analysis of Sociological Data (4)
Students test their own sociological research hypotheses using data from recent American and international social surveys and state-of-the-art computer software. Application of classical scientific method, interpretation of statistical results, and clear presentation of research findings. Prerequisites: CSS 2 or SOCI 60 or SOCL 60 and upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 109 and SOCA 109.

SOCI 109M. Research Reporting (4)
Students learn to write a research report/article. Course covers the architecture of reports, different audiences, scientific writing style, the literature review, and how to present methodology and findings. Students write a research report using research they conducted in other classes. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 110. Qualitative Research in Educational Settings (4)
Basic understanding of participant observation, interviewing, and other ethnographic research techniques through field experiences in school and community settings sponsored by CREATE. Students will learn to take field notes, write up interviews, and compose interpretive essays based on their field experiences. Prerequisites: SOCI 60 and upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 110 and SOCA 110A.

SOCI 111. Local Lives, Global Problems (4)
This course surveys the variety of ways that scholars across disciplines have studied local-global phenomena and developed theoretical, methodological, and empirical orientations that incorporate concern for place, space, and scale into their analytical lens. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 112. Social Psychology (4)
This course will deal with human behavior and personality development as affected by social group life. Major theories will be compared. The interaction dynamics of such substantive areas as socialization, normative and deviant behavior, learning and achievement, the social construction of the self, and the social identities will be considered. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 112 and SOCB 112.

SOCI 113. Sociology of the AIDS Epidemic (4)
This course considers the social, cultural, political, and economic aspects of HIV/AIDS. Topics include the social context of transmission; the experiences of women living with HIV; AIDS activism; representations of AIDS; and the impact of race and class differences. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 113 and SOCB 113.

SOCI 114. Just a Joke?: Sociology of Humor (4)
Telling jokes is fun, but it is also quintessentially a social act. How we make jokes and who we make jokes with is socially prescribed. We use humor every day in our social interactions to solidify social ties, but also to keep us apart. The course will examine the social dynamics of humor, paying specific attention to dimensions of race, gender, sexuality, disability, and national origin. Different types of humor will be analyzed, as well as the role of social media in altering joke culture. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 115. Social Problems (4)
Analyzes selected social problems in the United States, such as those regarding education, race relations, and wealth inequality from various sociological perspectives. The course also examines the various sites of debate discussion, like political institutions, TV and other media, and religious institutions. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 115 and SOCB 115.

SOCI 116. Gender and Language in Society (4)
(Same as LIGN 174.) This course examines how language contributes to the social construction of gender identities, and how gender impacts language use and ideologies. Topics include the ways language and gender interact across the life span (especially childhood and adolescence); within ethnolinguistic minority communities; and across cultures. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 116 and SOCB 118A.

SOCI 117. Language, Culture, and Education (4)
(Same as EDS 117.) The mutual influence of language, culture, and education will be explored; explanations of students’ school successes and failures that employ linguistic and cultural variables will be considered; bilingualism; cultural transmission through education. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 117 and SOCB 117.

SOCI 118. Sociology of Gender (4)
An analysis of the social, biological, and psychological components of becoming a man or a woman. The course will survey a wide range of information in an attempt to specify what is distinctively social about gender roles and identities; i.e., to understand how a most basic part of the “self”—womanhood or manhood—is socially defined and socially learned behavior. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 118 and SOCB 118.

SOCI 118E. Sociology of Language (4)
An examination of how the understanding of language can guide and inform sociological inquiries and a critical evaluation of key sociological approaches to language, including ethnomethodology, frame analysis, sociolinguistics, structuralism and poststructuralism, and others. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 118E and SOCB 118L.

SOCI 119. Sociology of Sexuality and Sexual Identities (4)
Introduction both to the sociological study of sexuality and to sociological perspectives in gay/lesbian studies. Examines the social construction of sexual meanings, identities, movements, and controversies; the relation of sexuality to other institutions; and the intersection of sexuality with gender, class, and race. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 119 and SOCB 119.

SOCI 120. Sociology Through Literature (4)
In this course, we will examine how literature and poetry may illuminate and sometimes go beyond sociological writings in highlighting and spelling out sociological concepts and social processes. This course will cover basic concepts (social role, power), economic concepts (class, greed), and political concepts (colonialism, revolution). Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 120T. Special Topics in Culture, Language, and Social Interaction (4)
This course will examine key issues in culture, language, and social interaction. Content will vary from year to year. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 121. Economy and Society (4)
An examination of a central concern of classical social theory: the relationship between economy and society, with special attention (theoretically and empirically) on the problem of the origins of modern capitalism. The course will investigate the role of technology and economic institutions in society; the influence of culture and politics on economic exchange, production, and consumption; the process of rationalization and the social division of labor; contemporary economic problems and the welfare state. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 121 and SOCI 121R or SOCI 121 and SOCC 121.

SOCI 121R. Economy and Society (4)
This fully online course explores the relationship between economy and society, with special attention (theoretically and empirically) to the problem of contemporary inequality. The course will investigate the way networks, institutions, and cultures constitute the economic world; the role of class, gender, and race in reproducing and justifying economic inequality; the rise of markets and financialization; and theoretically-informed alternatives to contemporary economic systems. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 121R and SOCI 121 or SOCI 121R and SOCC 121.

SOCI 122. Social Networks (4)
This course takes a social network approach to the study of society, examining the complex web of relationships— platonic, familial, professional, romantic—in which individual behavior is embedded. Special emphasis is placed on the unprecedented opportunities created by contemporary social media (e.g., Facebook, mobile phones, online dating websites) for answering fundamental sociological questions. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 123 Japanese Culture Inside/Out: A Transnational Perspective (4)
We examine cultural production in Japan and abroad, national and transnational political-economic and social influences, the idea of Japan in the West, and the idea of the West in Japan. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 124. The Good Society (4)
What institutions and policies are conducive to liberty, economic security, opportunity, a vibrant economy, shared prosperity, social cohesion, health, happiness, and other desirable features of a modern society? Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 125. Sociology of Immigration (4)
Immigration from a comparative, historical, and cultural perspective. Topics include factors influencing amount of immigration and destination of immigrants; varying modes of incorporation of immigrants; immigration policies and rights; the impact of immigration on host economies; refugees; assimilation; and return migration. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 125 and SOCB 125.

SOCI 125M. Sociology of Refugees, Asylum, and Forced Migration (4)
This course analyzes the origins of refugee flows, government policies, the role of nongovernmental organizations, and refugee experiences. It explores the debates about who is a refugee, how refugees decide when and where to move, the centrality of violence and persecution, and the place of refugees within the broader category of forced migration. The theoretical discussion engages concrete examples drawn from around the world in countries of origin, asylum, resettlement, and return. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 126. Social Organization of Education (4)
(Same as EDS 126.) The social organization of education in the U.S. and other societies; the functions of education for individuals and society; the structure of schools; educational decision making; educational testing; socialization and education; formal and informal education; cultural transmission. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 126 and SOCC 126.

SOCI 127. Immigration, Race, and Ethnicity (4)
Examination of the role that race and ethnicity play in immigrant group integration. Topics include theories of integration, racial and ethnic identity formation, racial and ethnic change, immigration policy, public opinion, comparisons between contemporary and historical waves of immigration. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 127 and SOCB 127.

SOCI 128. Religion and Popular Culture in East Asia (4)
(Same as HIEA 119.) Historical, social, and cultural relationships between religion and popular culture. Secularization of culture through images, worldviews, and concepts of right and wrong which may either derive from, or pose challenges to, the major East Asian religions.Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 129. The Family (4)
An examination of historical and social influences on family life. Analyzes contemporary families in the United States, the influences of gender, class, and race, and current issues such as divorce, domestic violence, and the feminization of poverty. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 129 and SOCC 129.

SOCI 130. Population and Society (4)
This course offers insight into why and how populations grow (and decline), and where and under what conditions changes in population size and/or structure change have positive and negative consequences for societies and environment. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 130 and SOCD 130.

SOCI 130E. Sociology of Higher Education (4)
This course introduces students to sociological theory and research as they apply to colleges and college life. It focuses on how colleges are organized and how variation within and between colleges affects individuals and society. Topics covered include college missions and outcomes, curriculum and pedagogy, college-to-work transitions, and access, equity, and inclusion. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 131. Sociology of Youth (4)
Chronological age and social status; analysis of social processes bearing upon the socialization of children and adolescents. The emergence of “youth cultures,” generational succession as a cultural problem. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 131 and SOCB 131.

SOCI 132. Gender and Work (4)
Examination and analysis of empirical research and theoretical perspectives on gender and work. Special attention to occupational segregation. Other topics include the interplay between work and family; gender, work and poverty; gender and work in the Third World. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 132 and SOCC 132.

SOCI 133. Immigration in Comparative Perspective (4)
Societies across the world are confronting new immigration. In this course, we will focus on Europe, Asia, and North America, and examine issues of nationalism, cultural diversity and integration, economic impacts, and government policy. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 133 and SOCB 133.

SOCI 133E. Sociology of Race and Ethnicity (4)
This course introduces students to sociological perspectives on race, ethnicity, and racial inequality. Students will develop an understanding of social forces that influence racial and ethnic identity and interactions. There will be particular emphasis on ways race and ethnicity shape experiences with social institutions (e.g., schools, government, media) and the emergence and persistence of racial inequality. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 134. The Making of Modern Medicine (4)
A study of the social, intellectual, and institutional aspects of the nineteenth-century transformation of clinical medicine, examining both the changing content of medical knowledge and therapeutics, and the organization of the medical profession. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 134 and SOCC 134A.

SOCI 135. Medical Sociology (4)
An inquiry into the roles of culture and social structure in mediating the health and illness experiences of individuals and groups. Topics include the social construction of illness, the relationships between patients and health professionals, and the organization of medical work. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 135 and SOCC 135.

SOCI 136. Data and Society (4)
This course explores the roles, challenges, and impacts of data and information technologies in contemporary societies. Information regarding discussion section is to be discussed in the first week of class. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 136E. Sociology of Mental Illness: A Historical Approach (4)
An examination of the social, cultural, and political factors involved in the identification and treatment of mental illness. This course will emphasize historical material, focusing on the eighteenth, nineteenth, and early twentieth centuries. Developments in England as well as the United States will be examined from a historical perspective. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 136E and SOCC 136A.

SOCI 136F. Sociology of Mental Illness in Contemporary Society (4)
This course will focus on recent developments in the mental illness sector and on the contemporary sociological literature on mental illness. Developments in England as well as the United States will be examined. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 136F and SOCC 136B.

SOCI 137. Sociology of Food (4)
Topics include food as a marker of social differences (e.g., gender, class, ethnicity); the changing character of food production and distribution; food as an object of political conflict; and the symbolic meanings and rituals of food preparation and consumption. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 137 and SOCB 137.

SOCI 138. Genetics and Society (4)
The class will first examine the direct social effects of the “genetic revolution”: eugenics, genetic discrimination, and stratification. Second, the implications of thinking of society in terms of genetics, specifically—sociobiology, social Darwinism, evolutionary psychology, and biology. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 138 and SOCC 138 or SOCI 138 and SOCI 138GS.

SOCI 138GS. Genetics and Society (4)
This course explores how genetics shapes public thinking and policy on topics like health and disability, reproduction, intelligence, delinquency, personal identity, and race and ethnicity. We will also see how social forces shape genetics research itself, and discuss controversies around gene patenting, cloning, newborn screening, eugenics, and genetic testing for disease, risk, and ancestry. Our discussions and field trips in Edinburgh will help us grasp genetics and society here in the U.S. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; students must apply and be accepted to the Global Seminar Program. Students cannot receive credit for both SOCI 138GS and SOCI 138.

SOCI 139. Social Inequality: Class, Race, and Gender (4)
Massive inequality in wealth, power, and prestige is ever present in industrial societies. In this course, causes and consequences of class, gender, racial, and ethnic inequality (“stratification”) will be considered through examination of classical and modern social science theory and research. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 139 and SOCC 139.

SOCI 140. Sociology of Law (4)
This course analyzes the functions of law in society, the social sources of legal change, social conditions affecting the administration of justice, and the role of social science in jurisprudence. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 140 and SOCC 140.

SOCI 140A. Defund Police and Prisons?—Alternatives to Punitive Social Control (4)
Mass protests against police brutality and racial injustice have introduced the public to radical critiques of policing and prisons. Abolitionist activists envision a world where punitive control is replaced with alternative approaches to social problems. This class will draw on sociological research to consider the arguments and evidence for such alternatives as drug and mental health courts, more “humane” prison models, restorative justice, and even the wholesale abolition of punishment. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 140F. Law and the Workplace (4)
This course examines how the US legal system has responded to workplace inequality and demands for employee rights. Particular attention is given to racial, gender, religious, and disability discrimination, as well as the law’s role in regulating unions, the global economy, and sweatshop labor. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 140F and SOCC 140F.

SOCI 140J. Sociology of Social Justice (4)
This course examines concrete historical attempts to build more free and equal societies and institutions. From the Paris commune to Black Lives Matter, we will study the challenges and consequences of real efforts to break down power, distribute economic resources fairly, and provide everyone with the opportunity to flourish as individuals. By analyzing these efforts through a sociological lens, the course provides a framework for thinking critically and empirically about social justice. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 140K. Law and Society in China (4)
This course offers an overview of the courts of China. The focus is not on blackletter law. Instead, we look at what grassroots courts do on a daily basis. China has arguably the largest court system in the world. What does it do? How are the courts organized internally? What is the relationship between the courts and other government bureaucracies? Is there the rule of law in China? The course will address these questions by reviewing latest empirical research on the subject area. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 141. Crime and Society (4)
A study of the social origins of criminal law, the administration of justice, causes, and patterns of criminal behavior, and the prevention and control of crime, including individual rehabilitation and institutional change, and the politics of legal, police, and correctional reform. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 141 and SOCC 141.

SOCI 142. Social Deviance (4)
This course studies the major forms of behavior seen as rule violations by large segments of our society and analyzes the major theories trying to explain them, as well as processes of rulemaking, rule enforcing, techniques of neutralization, stigmatization and status degradation, and rule change. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 142 and SOCB 142.

SOCI 143. Suicide (4)
Traditional and modern theories of suicide will be reviewed and tested. The study of suicide will be treated as one method for investigating the influence of society on the individual. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 143 and SOCB 143.

SOCI 144. Forms of Social Control (4)
The organization, development, and mission of social control agencies in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, with emphasis on crime and madness; agency occupations (police, psychiatrists, correctional work, etc.); theories of control movements. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 144 and SOCC 144.

SOCI 145. Violence and Society (4)
Focusing on American history, this course explores violence in the light of three major themes: struggles over citizenship and nationhood; the drawing and maintenance of racial, ethnic, and gender boundaries; and the persistence of notions of “masculinity” and its relation to violence. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 145 and SOCB 145.

SOCI 146. Criminal Punishment (4)
This course examines the historic and contemporary responses to criminal behavior in the United States. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 147. Organizations, Society, and Social Justice (4)
Organizations are dynamic forces in society. This course examines how organizations address human health and social justice issues in national and international settings, focusing on the links between internal dynamics of organizations and macro-level political, economic, and cultural factors. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 147 and SOCC 147.

SOCI 148. Political Sociology (4)
Course focuses on the interaction between state and society. It discusses central concepts of political sociology (social cleavages, mobilization, the state, legitimacy), institutional characteristics, causes, and consequences of contemporary political regimes (liberal democracies, authoritarianism, communism), and processes of political change. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 148 and SOCC 148.

SOCI 148E. Inequality and Jobs (4)
Some people do much better than others in the world of work. Causes and consequences of this inequality will be examined: How do characteristics of individuals (e.g., class, gender, race, education, talent) and characteristics of jobs affect market outcomes? Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 148E and SOCC 148L.

SOCI 148GS. Political Sociology (4)
Course focuses on the interaction between state and society. It discusses central concepts of political sociology (social cleavages, mobilization, the state, legitimacy), institutional characteristics, causes, and consequences of contemporary political regimes (liberal democracies, authoritarianism, communism), and processes of political change. Prerequisites: students must apply and be accepted to the Global Seminar Program. Students cannot receive credit for both SOCI 148 and SOCI 148GS.

SOCI 149. Sociology of the Environment (4)
The environment as a socially and technically shaped milieu in which competing values and interests play out. Relation of humanity to nature, conflicts between preservation and development, environmental pollution and contested illnesses. Will not receive credit for SOCI 149 and SOCC 149.

SOCI 150. Madness and the Movies (4)
Hollywood has had an ongoing obsession with mental illness. This course will examine a number of important or iconic films on this subject. By examining them against a background provided by relevant scholarly materials, we shall develop a critical perspective on these cultural artifacts. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 150 and SOCC 150.

SOCI 151. Social Movement from Civil Rights to Black Lives Matter (4)
A treatment of selected social movements dealing primarily with the struggles of African-Americans, Hispanics, and women to change their situation in American society. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 152. Social Inequality and Public Policy (4)
(Same as USP 133.) Primary focus on understanding and analyzing poverty and public policy. Analysis of how current debates and public policy initiatives mesh with alternative social scientific explorations of poverty. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 152 and SOCC 152.

SOCI 153. Urban Sociology (4)
(Same as USP 105.) Introduces students to the major approaches in the sociological study of cities and to what a sociological analysis can add to our understanding of urban processes. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. Will not receive credit for SOCI 153 and SOCC 153.

SOCI 154. Religious Institutions in America (4)
Examination of sociological theories for why people have religious beliefs. Also examines types of religious organizations, secularization, fundamentalism, religion and immigration, religion and politics, and religiously inspired violence and terrorism. The class will tend to focus on the American context. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 154 and SOCC 154.

SOCI 155. The City of San Diego (4)
A research-oriented course studying a specific city. Students will describe and analyze a local community of San Diego. Additional work on one citywide institution. Guest lecturers from San Diego organizations and government. Readings largely from city reports and news media. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 155 and SOCC 155.

SOCI 156. Sociology of Religion (4)
Diverse sociological explanations of religious ideas and religious behavior. The social consequences of different kinds of religious beliefs and religious organizations. The influence of religion upon concepts of history, the natural world, human nature, and the social order. The significance of such notions as “sacred peoples” and “sacred places.” The religious-like character of certain political movements and certain sociocultural attitudes. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 156 and SOCC 156.

SOCI 157. Religion in Contemporary Society (4)
Sacred texts, religious experiences, and ritual settings are explored from the perspective of sociological analysis. The types and dynamic of religious sects and institutions are examined. African and contemporary US religious data provide resources for lecture and comparative analysis. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 157 and SOCC 157.

SOCI 158. Islam in the Modern World (4)
The role of Islam in the society, culture, and politics of the Muslim people during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries; attempts by Muslim thinkers to accommodate or reject rival ideologies (such as nationalism and socialism); and a critical review of the relationship between Islam and the West. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 158 and SOCD 158.

SOCI 159. Special Topics in Social Organizations and Institutions (4)
Readings and discussion of particular substantive issues and research in the sociology of organizations and institutions, including such areas as population, economy, education, family, medicine, law, politics, and religion. Topics will vary from year to year. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 160. Sociology of Culture (4)
This course will examine the concept of culture, its “disintegration” in the twentieth century, and the repercussions on the integration of the individual. We will look at this process from a variety of perspectives, each focusing on one cultural fragment (e.g., knowledge, literature, religion) and all suggesting various means to reunify culture and consequently the individual. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 160 and SOCB 160.

SOCI 160E. Law and Culture (4)
This course examines major formulations of the relationship between law and culture in the sociological literature. Topics include formal law versus embedded law, law and morality, law and the self, legal consciousness, the rule of law, and the construction of legality. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 160E and SOCB 160L.

SOCI 161. Sociology of the Life Course (4)
This course explores concepts, theory and empirical research related to demographic, sociopsychological, and institutional aspects of the different stages of human development. It considers social influences on opportunities and constraints by gender, class, race/ethnicity, and historical period. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 161 and SOCB 161.

SOCI 162. Popular Culture (4)
An overview of the historical development of popular culture from the early modern period to the present. Also, a review of major theories explaining how popular culture reflects and/or affects patterns of social behavior. Students may not receive credit for both SOCI 162 and SOCB 162. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 163. Migration and the Law (4)
Provides a global sociological perspective on the development and consequences of laws regulating migration within and across nation-state borders. The ability of the nation-state to control migration using law and its policy instruments. The effects of different legal statuses on political and socioeconomic outcomes. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 163 and SOCC 163.

SOCI 165. Predicting the Future from Tarot Cards to Computer Algorithms (4)
No one can see the future but everyone must try. When we act with purpose, we must form an idea of the consequences of our actions and the world in which our action will unfold. We must form expectations about the future, and therefore, we must predict, often in the face of great uncertainty, what will and won’t happen. This course surveys the social devices from tarot cards to computer algorithms designed to solve the problem of prediction. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 165A. American News Media (4)
History, politics, social organization, and ideology of the American news media. This course,165A, surveys the development of the news media as an institution, from earliest newspapers to modern mass news media. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 165A and SOCC 165A.

SOCI 166. Sociology of Knowledge (4)
This course provides a general introduction to the development of the sociology of knowledge and will explore questions concerning social determination of consciousness as well as theoretical ways to articulate a critique of ideology. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 166 and SOCB 166.

SOCI 167. Science and War (4)
This class examines how science has been mobilized in the development of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction. The class applies sociological concepts to the analysis of modern technological violence. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 167 and SOCC 167.

SOCI 168. Marxism (4)
This course examines Marxism as social theory and social movement. It covers the origins and historical development of Marxist ideas, the history of Marxist movements and organizations, and the interaction between theory and political practice. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 168E. Sociology of Science (4)
A survey of theoretical and empirical studies concerning the workings of the scientific community and its relations with the wider society. Special attention will be given to the institutionalization of the scientific role and to the social constitution of scientific knowledge. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 168E and SOCC 168E.

SOCI 168G. Populism: Then and Now (4)
The rise of radical right-wing, authoritarian populism in democratic societies is one of the most remarkable features of our time. It inevitably awakens the memory of fascism in the 1930s. We will examine their distinct features, such as leadership cult, xenophobia, mockery of facts, disdain for the rule of law, and differences. Our focus will be the connection between the growth of economic inequality and racial animosity and the rise of contemporary populism in the U.S., Europe, and elsewhere. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 169. Debating Citizenship Rights (4)
Will survey the liberal, communitarian, social-democratic, nationalist, feminist, postnationalist, and multicultural views on the construction of the modern citizen and good society. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 169 and SOCD 169.

SOCI 170. Gender and Science (4)
Scientific practices have had a tremendous impact on our understandings of gender. Gender relations have also significantly influenced the character of scientific inquiry. The course will consider how and why these two processes intertwine. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 171. Technology and Society (4)
Does improved technology mean progress? Or, are environmental pollution and social alienation signs that technology is out of control? This class uncovers the social problems of key modern technologies such as automobile transport, factory farming, biotechnology, and nuclear power. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 168T and SOCI 171.

SOCI 172. Films and Society (4)
An analysis of films and how they portray various aspects of American society and culture. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 172 and SOCB 172.

SOCI 173. Sociology of Health, Illness, and Medicine (4)
This course will explore the social forces that shape our health and the way we understand illness. Themes will include American public health and health care, inequality and biomedicine, as well as special topics like suicide, lead, autism, and HIV/AIDS. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 174. Human Rights I: Introduction to Human Rights and Global Justice (4)
(Same as HMNR 100 and HITO 119.) Explores where human rights come from and what it means to integrate them into a history of modern society, from the conquest of the Americas and the origins of the Enlightenment, to the Holocaust and the contemporary human rights regime. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 175. Nationality and Citizenship (4)
Surveys the development of nationality and citizenship law in historical and comparative perspective with an emphasis on the United States, Latin America, and Europe. Examines competing sociological accounts for national variation and convergence; consequences of the law; and local, transnational, and extraterritorial forms of citizenship. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 175 and SOCD 175.

SOCI 176. Transnational Japan Research Practicum (4)
Focusing on Japan and its transnational relationships, this course combines analysis of readings with instruction in writing academic research papers. Students will spend about half their time on readings and half on their own research projects. We will analyze domestic and international contexts within which Japanese cultural forms emerge and influence others. Topics include Japanese approaches to popular culture, art, environment, social relationships, and social problems. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 177. International Terrorism (4)
(Same as POLI 1420.) This course covers the definitions, history, and internationalization of terrorism; the interrelation of religion, politics and terror; and the representation of terrorism in the media. A number of organizations and their activities in Europe and the Middle East are examined. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 177 and SOCD 177.

SOCI 178. The Holocaust (4)
The study of the unique and universal aspects of the Holocaust. Special attention will be paid to the nature of discrimination and racism, those aspects of modernity that make genocide possible, the relationship among the perpetrators, the victims and the bystanders, and the teaching, memory, and denial of the Holocaust. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 178 and SOCD 178.

SOCI 179. Social Change (4)
Course focuses on the development of capitalism as a worldwide process, with emphasis on its social and political consequences. Topics include precapitalist societies, the rise of capitalism in the West, and the social and political responses to its expansion elsewhere. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 179 and SOCD 179.

SOCI 180. Social Movements and Social Protest (4)
An examination of the nature of protests and violence, particularly as they occur in the context of larger social movements. The course will further examine those generic facets of social movements having to do with their genesis, characteristic forms of development, relationship to established political configurations, and gradual fading away. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 180 and SOCC 180.

SOCI 181. Modern Western Society (4)
This course examines the nature and dynamics of modern western society in the context of the historical process by which this type of society has emerged over the last several centuries. The aim of the course is to help students think about what kind of society they live in, what makes it the way it is, and how it shapes their lives. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 181 and SOCD 181.

SOCI 182. Ethnicity and Indigenous Peoples in Latin America (4)
Ethnicity and the reassertion of Indian identity in contemporary Latin America. Issues related to these trends are examined in comparative perspective, with attention to changes in global conditions and in the socioeconomic, political, and cultural contexts of Latin American modernization. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 182 and SOCD 182.

SOCI 183. The Geography of American Opportunity (4)
How does where you grow up affect where you end up? This course explores “who gets what where and why” by examining spatial inequalities in life chances across regions, rural and urban communities, and divergent local economies in the U.S. We will “place” places within their economic, socio-cultural, and historical contexts. Readings and exercises will uncover spatial variation in inequalities by race/ethnicity, immigrant status, gender, class, and LGBTQIA status that national averages obscure. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 183 and USP 183.

SOCI 184. Gender and Film (4)
This class will examine issues of masculinity and femininity through analysis of films. Emphasis is on contemporary American society and will include varying issues such as race, class, and sexualities; worlds of work; romance, marriage, and family. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 184 and SOCC 184.

SOCI 185. Globalization and Social Development (4)
Social development is more than sheer economic growth. It entails improvements in the overall quality of human life, particularly in terms of access to health, education, employment, and income for the poorer sectors of the population. Course examines the impact of globalization on the prospects for attaining these goals in developing countries. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 185 and SOCD 185.

SOCI 185GS. Globalization and Social Development (4)
Social development is more than sheer economic growth. It entails improvements in the overall quality of human life, particularly in terms of access to health, education, employment, and income for the poorer sectors of the population. Course examines the impact of globalization on the prospects for attaining these goals in developing countries. Students cannot receive credit in this course if they have already taken SOCI 185. Prerequisites: students must apply and be accepted to the Global Seminar Program.

SOCI 187. African Societies through Film (4)
Exploration of contemporary African urbanization and social change via film, including 1) transitional African communities, 2) social change in Africa, 3) Western vs. African filmmakers’ cultural codes. Ideological and ethnographic representations, aesthetics, social relations, and market demand for African films are analyzed. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 187 and SOCD 187.

SOCI 188. Field Research in Migrant Communities—Practicum (4)
Mexican Migration Field Research Program: Students work closely with faculty to conduct direct on-the-ground field research in a migrant community. Students work as teams, conducting either surveys, interviews, or ethnographic observations. Students are expected to produce an outline of a research paper based on the results from fieldwork. Prerequisites: students must apply and be accepted to the Mexican Migration Field Research Program (MMFRP).

SOCI 188D. Latin America: Society and Politics (4)
Course focuses on the different types of social structures and political systems in Latin America. Topics include positions in the world economy, varieties of class structure and ethnic cleavages, political regimes, mobilization and legitimacy, class alignments, reform and revolution. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 188D and SOCD 188D.

SOCI 188E. Community and Social Change in Africa (4)
The process of social change in African communities, with emphasis on changing ways of seeing the world and the effects of religion and political philosophies of social change. The methods and data used in various village and community studies in Africa will be critically examined. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 188E and SOCD 188A.

SOCI 188F. Modern Jewish Societies and Israeli Society (4)
Contradictory effects of modernization on Jewish society in Western and Eastern Europe and the plethora of Jewish responses: assimilation, fundamentalism, emigration, socialism, diaspora nationalism, and Zionism. Special attention will be paid to issues of discontinuity between Jewish societies and Israeli society. Simultaneously, we will scrutinize the influence of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict on Israeli society, state, and identity. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 188F and SOCD 188F.

SOCI 188G. Chinese Society (4)
The social structure of the People’s Republic of China since 1949, including a consideration of social organization at various levels: the economy, the policy, the community, and kinship institutions. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 188G and SOCD 188B.

SOCI 188GS. Change in Modern South Africa (4)
Using sociological and historical perspectives, this course examines the origins and demise of apartheid and assesses the progress that has been made since 1994, when apartheid was officially ended. Contrasts of racism in South Africa and the United States. Will not receive credit for SOCI 188GS and SOCI 188J. Prerequisites: students must apply and be accepted to the Global Seminar Program.

SOCI 188I. The Israeli-Palestinian Conflict (4)
In this course we will examine the national and colonial dimensions of this long-lasting conflict and then turn our attention to the legal, governmental/political, and everyday aspects of the Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza following the 1967 war. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 188J. Change in Modern South Africa (4)
Using sociological and historical perspectives, this course examines the origins and demise of apartheid and assesses the progress that has been made since 1994, when apartheid was officially ended. Contrasts of racism in South Africa and the United States. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 188J and SOCD 188J.

SOCI 188K. American Society (4)
Comparative and historical perspectives on US society. The course highlights “American exceptionalism”: Did America follow a special historical path, different from comparable nations in its social relations, politics, and culture? Specific topics include class relations, race, religion, and social policy. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Will not receive credit for SOCI 188K and SOCD 188K.

SOCI 188M. Social Movements in Latin America (4)
Course examines theories of social movements and changing patterns of popular protest and contentious mobilization in Latin America since the mid-twentieth century. Case studies include populism, guerrillas, liberation theology and movements of workers, peasants, women, and indigenous groups. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 188O. Settlements and Peacemaking in Israel (4)
We will examine the social, political, and religious factors that affect the nexus of Israeli settlements and Israeli-Arab and Israeli-Palestinian peace making. Special attention will be paid to the period after the 1967 War when these processes begun as well as to alternative resolutions to the conflict. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 189. Special Topics in Comparative-Historical Sociology (4)
Readings and discussion in selected areas of comparative and historical macrosociology. Topics may include the analysis of a particular research problem, the study of a specific society or of cross-national institutions, and the review of different theoretical perspectives. Contents will vary from year to year. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

SOCI 189GS. Making of a Modern Colony: Puerto Rico in the Twentieth Century (4)
This course presents an overview of the US-PR colonial relationship since 1898, focusing on key elements of its political and economic history. Special attention is given to the sugar cane era, the major social transformations of the mid-twentieth century, the expansion of US military installations, the collapse of the “Operation Bootstrap” development model, and the formation of a Puerto Rican diaspora. Prerequisites: students must apply and be accepted to the Global Seminar Program.

SOCI 190GS. Contemporary Problems, Politics, and Potentialities in Puerto Rico (4)
An exploration of political governance of Puerto Rico and its history, this course introduces students to a variety of contemporary struggles to address the problems Puerto Ricans face and move Puerto Rico beyond its political status impasse. Prerequisites: students must apply and be accepted to the Global Seminar Program.

SOCI 192. Senior Seminar in Sociology (1)
The Senior Seminar Program is designed to allow senior undergraduates to meet with faculty members in a small group setting to explore an intellectual topic in sociology (at the upper-division level). Topics will vary from quarter to quarter. Senior Seminars may be taken for credit up to four times, with a change in topic, and permission of the department. Enrollment is limited to twenty students, with preference given to seniors. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: instructor permission or department stamp, upper-division standing.

SOCI 194. Research Seminar in Washington, DC (4)
(Same as PS 194, COGN 194, ERTH 194, HIST 193, USP 194.) Course attached to six-unit internship taken by students participating in the UCDC Program. Involves weekly seminar meetings with faculty and teaching assistant and a substantial research paper. Prerequisites: department approval. Participating in UCDC Program. Will not receive credit for SOCI 194 and SOCE 194.

SOCI 196A. Honors Seminar: Advanced Studies in Sociology (4)
This seminar will permit honors students to explore advanced issues in the field of sociology. It will also provide honors students the opportunity to develop a senior thesis proposal on a topic of their choice and begin preliminary work on the honors thesis under faculty supervision. Prerequisites: acceptance into Department of Sociology Honors Program.

SOCI 196B. Honors Seminar: Supervised Thesis Research (4)
This seminar will provide honors candidates the opportunity to complete research on and preparation of a senior honors thesis under close faculty supervision. Prerequisites: completion of SOCI 196A.

SOCI 198. Directed Group Study of Sociology (4)
Group study of specific topics under the direction of an interested faculty member. Enrollment will be limited to a small group of students who have developed their topic and secured appropriate approval from the departmental committee on independent and group studies. These studies are to be conducted only in areas not covered in regular sociology courses. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and department approval required.

SOCI 198RA. Research Apprenticeship of Sociology (4)
Students work on a graduate student’s research project supervised by the graduate student’s faculty mentor. Students assist with research tasks, gather material for a research report to be written in SOCI 109M. May be taken for credit up to two times. Prerequisites: students must apply and be accepted to the research apprenticeship course. Participants must be majors in sociology with junior or senior standing and a GPA of 3.2 in all sociology courses taken at UC San Diego. Individual projects may require other training, such as SOCI 60.

SOCI 199. Independent Study of Sociology (4)
Tutorial: individual study under the direction of an interested faculty member in an area not covered by the present course offerings. Approval must be secured from the departmental committee on independent studies. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and department approval required.

SYN 1. Communicating for a Changing Planet (4)
Synthesis 1 asks students to critically examine through an interdisciplinary and antiracist lens how we communicate about the climate crisis in order to address the question of how we get people to respond and take action. Through a variety of assignments and activities, students develop an awareness of both the message of a text and how the author crafted that message. They learn how to assess the purpose, audience, and context of different rhetorical situations. Prerequisites: Seventh College students only, completion of UC Entry Level Writing requirement, must be taken for a letter grade to count toward Seventh College general-education requirements. Duplicate credit with SYN 1R.

SYN 1R. Communicating for a Changing Planet (4)
Synthesis 1R asks students to critically examine through an interdisciplinary and antiracist lens how we communicate about the climate crisis in order to address the question of how we get people to respond and take action. Through a variety of assignments and activities, students develop an awareness of both the message of a text and how the author crafted that message. They learn how to assess the purpose, audience, and context of different rhetorical situations. Prerequisites: Seventh College students only, completion of UC Entry Level Writing requirement, must be taken for a letter grade to count toward Seventh College general-education requirements. Duplicate credit with SYN 1.

SYN 2. Inquiring about a Changing Planet (4)
Synthesis 2 builds upon the skills developed in Synthesis 1. In the first half of the quarter, students learn the links between climate change and racial justice. Using an antiracist framework, students work in a small group to research an aspect of the climate crisis. In the second half of the quarter, students are introduced to project design and learn how to draft a proposal. Students learn how to determine the scope of a project based on such criteria as time, money, and potential impact. Prerequisites: Seventh College students only, SYN 1/SYN 1R, must be taken for a letter grade to count toward Seventh College general-education requirements. Duplicate credit with SYN 2R.

SYN 2R. Inquiring about a Changing Planet (4)
Synthesis 2 builds upon the skills developed in Synthesis 1. In the first half of the quarter, students learn the links between climate change and racial justice. Using an antiracist framework, students work in a small group to research an aspect of the climate crisis. In the second half of the quarter, students are introduced to project design and learn how to draft a proposal. Students learn how to determine the scope of a project based on such criteria as time, money, and potential impact. Prerequisites: Seventh College students only, SYN 1/SYN 1R, must be taken for a letter grade to count toward Seventh College general-education requirements. Duplicate credit with SYN 2.

SYN 100. Engaging with a Changing Planet (4)
SYN 100 is a project-based course that builds upon foundational skills by taking a collaborative, interdisciplinary approach to complex global problems. Each section focuses on a different theme, challenge, or question related to the climate crisis. Despite the different class topics, all students will learn by designing and executing a team project that addresses their section’s theme. Prerequisites: restricted to Seventh College students only, upper-division standing, completion of SYN 1/1R and 2/2R, must be taken for a letter grade to count toward Seventh College general-education requirements.

SYN 150. Defining the Scope of a Changing Planet (4)
SYN 150 is recommended for Seventh College transfer students in preparation for SYN 100. Students critically examine, through an interdisciplinary and antiracist lens, key issues impacting our changing planet. Prerequisites: restricted to Seventh College transfer students only, must be taken for a letter grade to count toward Seventh College high-impact requirement, cannot be taken concurrently or after SYN 100.

SYN 199. Independent Study (2 or 4)
Independent study designated for Seventh College students who wish to carry out a project they begin in previous synthesis program courses. Prerequisites: completion of SYN 100, restricted to upper-division Seventh College students only, must be taken P/NP only, can be taken up to two times for credit, must complete at least ninety units with a 2.5 GPA in upper-division undergraduate courses at UC San Diego, department approval is required, enrollment satisfies the Seventh College high-impact requirement.

TDAC 1. Introduction to Acting (4)
A beginning course in the fundamentals of acting: establishing a working vocabulary and acquiring the basic skills of the acting process. Through exercises, compositions, and improvisations, the student actor explores the imagination as the actor’s primary resource, and the basic approach to text through action. Prerequisites: none.

TDAC 101. Acting I (4)
This course focuses on beginning scene study with an emphasis on exploring action/objective and the given circumstances of a selected text. Prerequisites: THAC or TDAC 1 or consent of instructor.

TDAC 102. Acting II (4)
Further study in the application of the given circumstances to a text and the development of characterization. Prerequisites: TDAC 101.

TDAC 103A.Acting Intensive I (4)
An intensive foundation class for students interested in professional actor training. Using Viewpoints, students will train the physical, vocal, and emotional aspects of their actor instrument toward developing character and relationships by using scenes from contemporary and modern plays. Prerequisites: TDAC 102.

TDAC 103B. Acting Intensive II (4)
A continuation of TDAC 103A. Working from Meisner technique, students will learn to deepen and detail their objectives, spontaneous response, and deep listening skills. Focus on the process that will lead to scene work using this technique. Prerequisites: TDAC 103A, department stamp, and consent of instructor.

TDAC 104. Classical Text (4)
Studies in the heightened realities of poetic drama. Verse analysis, research, methods and how to approach a classical dialogue. Prerequisites: TDAC 102.

TDAC 105. Rehearsing Shakespeare (4)
Advanced exploration of Shakespeare’s language through examining and performing scenes from the plays. Admission by audition/interview. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: TDAC 102.

TDAC 106. Chekhov Acting (4)
Practical exercises, discussion, text analysis, and scene work on the writings of Anton Chekhov. Admission by audition/interview. Prerequisites: TDAC 102.

TDAC 107. Improvisation for the Theatre (4)
Improvisation for the Theatre explores improvisation techniques as an alternative and unique approach to acting. Students should have a performance background. Prerequisites: THAC or TDAC 1.

TDAC 108. Advanced Topics (4)
Advanced topics in acting, such as avant-garde drama, commedia, or Beckett, for students who possess basic acting techniques. May be taken for credit four times. Prerequisites: TDAC 102.

TDAC 109. Singing for Actors (4)
This course introduces basic skills of breathing, placement, diction, musicianship, harmony, interpretation, and presentation needed by actors for roles requiring singing. Through a combination of group and individual coaching in class, students will prepare a program of short solo and ensemble pieces for a finals-week presentation. Prerequisites: THAC or TDAC 1 and audition; department stamp.

TDAC 110. Acting for the Camera (4)
This course is designed to aid the actor in the transition from stage to film work. Examination of film production and its physical characteristics and the acting style needed for work in film and television. Students will perform in simulated studio setting on camera. Prerequisites: TDAC 102.

TDAC 111. Freeing the Voice (4)
Intensive workshop for actors and directors designed to “free the voice,” with special emphasis on characteristics and vocal flexibility in a wide range of dramatic texts. This proven method combines experimental and didactic learning with selected exercises, texts, tapes, films, and total time commitment. Prerequisites: TDAC 101 and audition/interview required.

TDAC 112. Senior Seminar in Acting (4)
An in-depth study seminar focused on special issues in acting as they relate to contemporary theatre. Of particular interest to students who plan to pursue a career in this area of theatre. Prerequisites: TDAC 102.

TDAC 115. Movement for Actors (4)
An exploration of the wide array of physical skills necessary for the actor. Using techniques derived from mime, clowning, sports, acrobatics, and improvisation, students will investigate their individual physical potential as well as their sense of creativity and imagination. Prerequisites: THAC or TDAC 101.

TDAC 120. Ensemble (4)
An intensive theatre practicum designed to generate theatre created by an ensemble with particular emphasis upon the analysis of text. Students will explore and analyze the script and its author. Ensemble segments include black theatre, Chicano theatre, feminist theatre, and commedia dell’arte. Audition may be required. A maximum of four units may be used for major credit. (Cross-listed with ETHN 146A.) Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

TDAC 122. Ensemble: Undergraduate Production (2–6)
Participation in a fully staged theatre production directed by an MFA or PhD student for the Department of Theatre and Dance. Admission by audition only. A maximum of four units may be used for major credit. Prerequisites: consent of the instructor; department stamp.

TDAC 123. Advanced Studies in Performance (2–6)
Participation in a fully staged season production that is directed by a faculty member or guest for the Department of Theatre and Dance. Admission by audition only. A maximum of four units may be used for major credit. Prerequisites: consent of the instructor; department stamp.

TDDE 1. Introduction to Design for the Theatre (4)
A survey of contemporary and historical concepts and practices in the visual arts of the theatre; studies in text analysis, studio processes and technical production; elementary work in design criticism, scale model making, and costume design. A course serving as an introduction to theatre design and production.

TDDE 101. Theatre Process—Scenery (4)
A hands-on course develops craft skills and solution-finding process in design including script analysis, concept sketches, research, and scale model making. An exploration of fundamental ways of seeing and understanding visual design. Prerequisites: THDE or TDDE 1 or THPR or TDPR 1.

TDDE 102. Advanced Scenic Design (4)
An advanced course based on the “practice” of scenic design, dealing with the solution finding process, from text to idea to realized work. Prerequisites: THDE or TDDE 1, THDE or TDDE 101, or consent of instructor.

TDDE 111. Theatre Process—Costume Design (4)
The process of the costume designer from script analysis and research visualization of ideas, through the process of costume design. Lecture and demonstration labs parallel lecture material. This course is intended for those interested in a basic understanding of the costumer’s process. No previous drawing or painting skills required. Prerequisites: THDE or TDDE 1.

TDDE 112. Advanced Costume Design (4)
An advanced course based on the “practice” of costume design, dealing with the solution finding process, from text to idea to realized work. Prerequisites: THDE or TDDE 1, THDE or TDDE 111, or consent of instructor.

TDDE 121. Theatre Process—Lighting Design (4)
One of three classes in theatre process. The course aims to develop basic skills in lighting design through practical projects, lab work and lecture. These emphasize collaborating, manipulating light and color, and developing craft skills. Prerequisites: THDE or TDDE 1 or THPR or TDPR 3 or consent of instructor.

TDDE 130. Assistant Designer (2–6)
A production-oriented course that continues to introduce students to the fundamentals of design assisting. Laboratory format allows the student to work with faculty, graduate, or advanced undergraduate theatre designers, doing research, developing design concepts, and supporting the designer in a number of professional ways. May be taken for credit up to six times for a maximum of twelve units. A maximum of eight total units may be used towards major requirements. Prerequisites: TDDE 1 and TDPR 1, 2, 3, or 5; consent of instructor and department approval required.

TDDE 131. Special Topics in Theatre Design (4)
A course designed to expose the theatre design students to a variety of specialized topics that will vary from quarter to quarter. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: THDE or TDDE 1 or consent of instructor.

TDDE 132. Undergraduate Main Stage Production: Design (2–6)
A course that will guide a student in a design assignment on the undergraduate main stage production. Specialized topics dependent on the design requirements of the production. Students may repeat this course a maximum of six times or can receive up to twelve units, whichever is met first. A maximum of eight total units may be used towards major requirements. Prerequisites: TDDE 1 and TDDE 101 or TDDE 111 or TDDE 121 or TDDE 131, or consent of instructor. Instructor and department approval required.

TDDE 141. Theatre Process—Sound Design (4)
A hands-on course on the process of sound design from conception to planning and implementation. The course will concentrate equally on the technical and artistic aspects of the sound design process and will include a survey of modern audio technologies. Prerequisites: TDPR 5 or TDPR 6 or TDDE 1 or MUS 173 or consent of instructor.

TDDE 142. Advanced Sound Design (4)
This course focuses on advancing students in their artistic and technical skills in sound design. A large-scale project will be identified with special attention given to text analysis and technical specification of the sound design. Prerequisites: TDDE 1 and TDDE 141 or equivalent, or consent of instructor.

TDDE 151. Digital Video Design (4)
This course will examine the field of projection design for theatre and dance performance. Students will study and produce original works based on the theoretical and aesthetic approaches of animation, film, performance, and installation art that influence contemporary projection design. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

TDDE 169A. Digital Rendering for Theatre and Performance Design I (4)
Introductory course that explores a variety of digital rendering methods for artistic 2-D, 3-D, and moving graphics visualization in theatre and performance design. Course objective is to synthesize and expand traditional drawing and painting methods with modern digital media-based applications. Prerequisites: none.

TDDE 169B. Digital Rendering for Theatre and Performance Design II (4)
A continuation of TDDE 169A. Studio course explores advanced digital rendering methods for artistic 2-D, 3-D, and moving graphics for theatre and performance design. Focus will be on advanced techniques in the process of visualization from conception to production. Prerequisites: TDDE 169A.

TDDE 190. Major Project in Design/Theatre Production (4)
For the advanced design/production student. Concentration on a particularly challenging design or theatre production assignment, including such areas as assistant designer (scenery, lighting, or costumes), technical director, master cutter, or master electrician. May be repeated one time for credit. A maximum of eight units of major project study, regardless of area (design, directing, or stage management) may be used to fulfill major requirements. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: admission by consent of instructor only. See department for application form.

TDDR 101. Stage Management (4)
Discussion and research into the duties, responsibilities, and roles of a stage manager. Work to include studies in script analysis, communication, rehearsal procedures, performance skills, and style and conceptual approach to theatre. THGE or TDGE 1, THAC or TDAC 1, and THDE or TDDE 1 recommended.

TDDR 102. Advanced Stage Management (4)
This course is a further exploration of theory as a guide to practice in the field of stage management and other leadership roles. This class will delve more deeply into many of the topics that are covered in TDDR 101 and will encourage the development of numerous hard and soft skills that are necessary to become a successful stage manager. Prerequisites: TDDR 101.

TDDR 108. Text Analysis for Actors and Directors (4)
An introduction to analyzing text from a director’s point of view as part of a director’s preproduction process. The class will focus on analyzing story, the underlying dramatic structure in terms of dramatic action, narrative vision, and artistic drive. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. Restricted to students within the TH26 major. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

TDDR 111. Directing-Acting Process (4)
A studio class that investigates the fundamental skills a director needs to work with actors. Working with actors, students learn how to animate the text onstage through status exercises and scene work as they develop their skill in text work, staging, and dramatic storytelling. Prerequisites: TDDR 108 or TDHT 10, upper-division standing or consent of instructor. Restricted to students within the TH26 major. All other students will be allowed as space permits.

TDDR 190. Major Project in Directing (2–6)
For the advanced student in directing. Intensive concentration on the full realization of a dramatic text from research and analysis through rehearsal and into performance. A maximum of eight units of major project study, regardless of area (design, directing, or stage management) may be used to fulfill major requirements. See department for application. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: THDR or TDDR 108, THDR or TDDR 111, consent of instructor, and department stamp.

TDDR 191. Major Project in Stage Management (4)
For the advanced student in stage management. Intensive concentration on the full realization of a dramatic text, from research and analysis through rehearsal and final performance. A maximum of eight units of major project study regardless of area (design, directing, stage management, or playwriting) may be used to fulfill major requirements. See department for application. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: THPR or TDPR 4, THPR or TDPR 104, THDR or TDDR 101, consent of instructor, and department stamp.

TDDM 1. Introduction to Dance Making (4)
Explores the concepts and processes of dance making through creative projects, discussions, and the examination of major dance works. Recommended preparation: No prior dance experience required. Open to all levels. Prerequisites: none.

TDDM 5. Site Specific Dance and Performance (4)
The study of dance and performance creation in relation to the environment, political activism, happenings, and ritual. Students explore ideas within the unique attributes of architecture, natural landscapes, public spaces, visual art, historic landmarks, and cultural contexts. Recommended preparation: No prior dance experience needed. Open to all levels. Prerequisites: none.

TDDM 100. Dance Making 1 (4)
Practical and conceptual studies of approaches to dance making. Compositional projects enable students to create short works for solo, duet, and small group situations with options to explore interdisciplinary collaboration, specific sites, text, political and societal issues, and advanced partner work. Prerequisites: TDDM 1 or consent of instructor.

TDDM 101. Dance Making 2 (4)
The study of compositional, ensemble, collaborative, and improvisational approaches to dance making. Structures, scores, tasks, imagination, timing, spontaneity, partnering skills, composing in the moment, shared authorship, and experimentation facilitate the development of movement vocabulary. Prerequisites: TDDM 1 or consent of instructor.

TDGE 1. Introduction to Theatre (4)
An introduction to fundamental concepts in drama and performance. Students will attend performances and learn about how the theatre functions as an art and as an industry in today’s world. Prerequisites: none.

TDGE 3. Cultivating the Creative Mind (4)
This course will use the theatrical context to integrate scientific research about creativity, group dynamics, and related topics. Through a mix of theoretical and experiential classes and assignments, we will explore the intersection of theatre and neuroscience, investigating and expanding the creative mind. Prerequisites: none

TDGE 5. A Glimpse into Acting (4)
An introductory course on acting fundamentals for students without an acting background. Through analysis of acting on film, students will explore the actor’s craft and practice these skills in studio exercises to better understand how an actor approaches a text. Prerequisites: none.

TDGE 10. Theatre and Film (4)
Theatre and Film analyzes the essential differences between theatrical and cinematic approaches to drama. Through selected play/film combinations, the course looks at how the director uses actors and the visual languages of the stage and screen to guide and stimulate the audience’s responses. Prerequisites: none.

TDGE 11. Great Performances on Film (4)
Course examines major accomplishments in screen acting from the work of actors in films or in film genres. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: none.

TDGE 12. Topics in Cinema and Race (4)
This course explores filmed representations of race and diversity and examines works by underrepresented filmmakers. Course topics vary; they include African American film, Latino/a film, Asian American film, films by Spike Lee, stereotypes on film, and other such topics. Students may not enroll in the same topic of TDGE 12 that they have already taken in TDGE 11, Great Performances on Film. This will count as a duplicate of credit for repeating the same film topic. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: none.

TDGE 25. Public Speaking (4)
This course is designed to establish a clear understanding of the fundamentals of effective oral communication. The methodologies explore the integration of relaxation, concentration, organization, and clear voice and diction as applied to various public speaking modes. Prerequisites: none.

TDGE 50. Musical Theatre Chorus (2)
Study and perform selected songs from American musical theatre. Open to all students. No audition required. Attendance at rehearsals and performance are mandatory. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit six times. Prerequisites: none. 

TDGE 87. First-year Student Seminar in Theatre and Dance (1)
Seminar on a topic in theatre or dance on a level appropriate for first-year students, conducted in an informal, small group setting limited to ten to twenty students. Topics will vary. Prerequisites: open to first-year students only.

TDGE 89. Dance Movement Exploration (4)
An introduction to dance movement and understanding your body. A contemporary approach to dancing and its many genres as an expressive medium and form of communication. A movement course but no dance training or background in dance needed. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: none.

TDGE 100. Creating the Role of “Leader” (4)
Acting and leadership require “choices” to play a role. The role of leader requires authenticity, collaboration, listening, presence, vision, and influence. Students will explore characteristics of strong leaders, and utilizing traditional acting techniques build powerful capabilities of leadership. No prior theatre/acting experience needed. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

TDGE 105. Exploring Acting (4)
An acting course for nonmajors, building on the acting fundamentals developed in TDGE 5. Using analysis of film acting to practice in studio exercises and scene work, student actors learn to approach a text using imagination as their primary tool. Prerequisites: TDGE 5 or consent of instructor.

TDGE 122. The Films of Woody Allen (4)
Students explore a variety of issues: screenwriting, directing, cinematography, and editing; the intersection of comedy and tragedy in Allen’s works; recurring themes; and critical responses. Students view thirteen films and write two three-page essays and one ten-page research paper. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

TDGE 124. Cult Films: Weirdly Dramatic (4)
A select survey of eight to ten exceptional offbeat, frequently low-budget films from the last sixty years that have attained cult status. The mix includes Tod Browning’s Freaks (1932) to John Water’s Pink Flamingos (1973). Aspects of bad taste, cinematic irony, and theatrical invention will be highlighted. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

TDGE 125. Topics in Theatre and Film (4)
Great films and the performance of the actors in them are analyzed in their historical, cinematic, or theatrical contexts. This course examines the actor’s contribution to classic cinema and the social and aesthetic forces at work in film. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

TDGE 126. Storytelling and Design in Animation (4)
This course will use a broad range of animation styles and genres to examine larger issues in art practice, focusing closely on the relationship between form and content, and how sound/set/costume/character design impacts narrative. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

TDGE 131. Playing Indian: Native American and First Nations Cinema (4)
This course examines recent movies by Native American/First Nations artists that labor to deconstruct and critique reductive stereotypes about America’s First Peoples in Hollywood cinema. Carving spaces of “visual sovereignty” (Raheja), these films propose complex narratives and characterizations of indigeneity. Students may receive credit for only one of the following: TDGE 131, TDGE 131R, ETHN 163F, or ETHN 163FR. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

TDGE 131R. Playing Indian: Native American and First Nations Cinema (4)
This online course examines recent movies by Native American/First Nations artists that labor to deconstruct and critique reductive stereotypes about America’s first peoples in Hollywood cinema. Carving spaces of “visual sovereignty” (Raheja), these films propose complex narratives and characterizations of indigeneity. This course is a distance education course. Students may receive credit for only one of the following: TDGE 131, TDGE 131R, ETHN 163F, or ETHN 163FR. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

TDGE 133. Visual Ideas (4)
An exploration of fundamental ways of seeing and thinking about the performance space. A look at the design process as it reflects styles and attitudes through an examination of text/image/meaning/message in theatre, dance, opera, and visual arts. With a special emphasis on the “solution-finding process” in design, as a leap from text to context, to finalized design. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

TDGE 134. Disability and Performative Exploration: Struggle for Inclusion (4)
This class examines disability in the performative context, exploring the representation of people with disabilities and the struggle for access and inclusion. The frame of advocacy, understanding, and creative collaboration will deepen the historical perspective on disability. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

TDGE 192. Senior Seminar in Theatre and Dance (1)
The Senior Seminar Program is designed to allow senior undergraduates to meet with faculty members in a small group setting to explore an intellectual topic in theatre and dance (at the upper-division level). Topics will vary from quarter to quarter. Senior Seminars may be taken for credit up to four times, with a change in topic, and permission of the department. Enrollment is limited to twenty students, with preference given to seniors. Prerequisites: senior standing; department stamp and/or consent of instructor.

TDGE 196A. Honors Study in Theatre and Dance (4)
The Honors thesis is designed to give theatre and dance majors the opportunity to undertake advanced creative research in an area of specialization (directing, history, pedagogy, performance, playwriting, or stage management), culminating in the writing of a thesis and the oral or performative presentation of the thesis to the members of the student’s Honors Committee. Application available with the theatre and dance undergraduate coordinator. This is a two-quarter research project. Students enroll in the winter and spring quarters of their senior year. Deadline to apply is fall quarter of the student’s senior year. Prerequisites: upper-division course work in the area of thesis, department stamp, 3.5 GPA in major, approval of faculty member.

TDGE 196B. Honors Study in Theatre and Dance (4)
A continuation of TDGE 196A. Theatre and dance Honors students complete thesis work in directing, history, pedagogy, performance, playwriting, or stage management under the close supervision of a faculty member. All students enrolled will present their thesis work during a departmental showcase event at the end of the spring quarter. Prerequisites: TDGE 196A, upper-division course work in the area of thesis, department stamp, 3.5 GPA in major, approval of faculty member.

TDGE 198. Directed Group Studies (0-2-4)
Group studies, readings, projects, and discussions in theatre history, problems of production and performance, and similarly appropriate subjects. Prerequisites: upper-division standing, 2.5 GPA, consent of instructor, and department stamp. May be repeated for a total of 12 units.

TDGE 199. Special Projects (0-2-4)
Qualified students will pursue a special project in theatre history, problems of production and performance, and similarly appropriate topics. Prerequisites: upper-division standing, 2.5 GPA, consent of instructor, and department stamp.

TDHD 20. Looking at Dance (4)
Focuses on the foundational aesthetic concepts of dance creation and performance within a diverse range of cultural contexts. Students develop descriptive, perceptual, and analytical skills. Prerequisites: TDTR 10 or consent of instructor.

TDHD 21. Dance Pioneers of the Twentieth and Twenty-First Centuries (4)
An historical overview of the most influential international dance pioneers in recent history, the cultural, political, and artistic contexts that informed the development of their work and the impact that their achievements have on the evolution of dance worldwide. Prerequisites: TDTR 10 or consent of instructor.

TDHD 175. Cultural Perspectives on Dance (4)
The study of dance forms from a global perspective. An analysis and understanding of international dance traditions and their connections to religion, ritual, folklore, custom, festive celebration, popular culture, art, and political movements. Prerequisites: TDTR 10 or consent of instructor.

TDHD 176. Dance History—Special Topics (4)
An in-depth exposure to an important topic in dance history, theory, aesthetics, and criticism. Topics vary from quarter to quarter. Prerequisites: TDTR 10, upper-division standing.

TDHT 10. Introduction to Play Analysis (4)
An introduction to the fundamental techniques of analyzing dramatic texts. Focus is on the student’s ability to describe textual elements and their relationships to each other as well as on strategies for writing critically about drama. Prerequisites: none.

TDHT 21. Ancient and Medieval Theatre (4)
Ancient and medieval theatre. Explores the roots of contemporary theatre in world performance traditions of ancient history with a focus on humans’ gravitation toward ritual and play. Examples come from Egypt, Greece, Rome, Mesoamerica, Japan, China, India, Indonesia, Persia, and England. Prerequisites: none.

TDHT 22. Theatre 1500–1900 (4)
Explores varieties of drama in professional theatre from 1500 to 1900 in Europe, Japan, and China, and their interconnections both formal and historical. Prerequisites: none.

TDHT 23. Twentieth-Century Theatre (4)
Twentieth-century theatre: a survey of drama from 1900 to 1990, with attention also paid to the development of avant-garde performance forms. Plays discussed reflect developments in Europe and the United States, but also transnational, postcolonial perspectives. Prerequisites: none.

TDHT 101. Topics in Dramatic Literature and Theatre History (4)
An in-depth exposure to an important individual writer or subject in dramatic literature and/or theatre history. Topics vary from quarter to quarter. Recent courses have included Modern French Drama, and the History of Russian Theatre. No prior knowledge in theatre history is needed. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. 

TDHT 102. Masters in Theatre (4)
Focus on the artists of seminal importance in the theatre. Consideration will be given to theory and practice of the artist, with emphasis on theatrical realizations that can be reconstructed by integrated research. Examples of recent courses include Molière, Fugard, and Strindberg. Prerequisites: TDHT 10 or consent of instructor. May be taken three times for credit.

TDHT 103. Asian American Theatre (4)
This course examines pivotal dramatic works in the history of professional Asian American theatre in the United States (1960s to the present). Issues include interculturalism, the crossover between minority theatres and mainstream venues, and the performance of identity. TDHT 103 is an approved Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) course. No prior knowledge in theatre history is needed. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

TDHT 104. Italian Comedy (4)
Continuities and changes in Italian comedy from the Romans through the Renaissance and commedia dell’arte to modern comedy. No prior knowledge in theatre history is needed. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

TDHT 105. French Comedy (4)
Masterpieces of French farce and comedy from the seventeenth century to the twentieth century studied French theatrical and cultural contexts. Readings include plays by Moliere, Marivauz, Beaumarchais, and Feydeau. No prior knowledge in theatre history is needed. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. 

TDHT 107. American Theatre (4)
In this course we will examine representative plays and playwrights who write about the “American” experience from a variety of historical periods and diverse cultural communities. Playwrights will include Glaspell, O’Neill, Williams, Hansberry, Valdez, Yamauchi, Parks, Kushner, Mamet, Greenberg, Hwang, Letts, and Cruz. Theatre companies will include The Group, Provincetown Players, San Francisco Mime Troupe, East/West Players, Teatro Campesino, Spiderwoman, and Cornerstone. TDHT 107 is an approved Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) course. No prior knowledge in theatre history is needed. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

TDHT 108. Luis Valdez (4)
This course examines the works of Luis Valdez, playwright, director, screenwriter, film director, and founder of the Teatro Campesino. Readings include plays and essays by Valdez and critical books and articles about this important American theatre artist. No prior knowledge in theatre history is needed. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

TDHT 109. African American Theatre (4)
This course provides a survey of the contributions to the theatre arts made by African Americans. Analytic criteria will include the historical context in which the piece was crafted; thematic and stylistic issues; aesthetic theories and reception. TDHT 109 is an approved Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) course. No prior knowledge in theatre history is needed. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

TDHT 110. Chicanx Theatre (4)
This course examines Chicanx theatre as a dynamic, multivocal, aesthetically complex, and generative site for the exploration of Chicanx history, politics, and cultural identity. Students engage with a variety of plays and performance artists that track the different themes and inquiries that have emerged out of the Chicano movement. Cross-listed with ETHN 132. Students may receive credit for one of the following: TDHT 110 or ETHN 132. No prior knowledge in theatre history is needed. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. 

TDHT 111. Latinx Theatre and Performance (4)
This course examines performances from Latinx America that address issues of immigration, sexual politics, and gender, racial, and economic inequality among other topics. Students learn about how artists and communities use performance to explore a wealth of cultural practices and identities that have emerged alongside, and often in response to, the historical conditions that shape the disparate yet interconnected experiences of Latinx people living in the U.S. (colonialism, slavery, imperialism). Cross-listed with ETHN 133. Students may receive credit for one of the following: TDHT 111 or ETHN 133. No prior knowledge in theatre history is needed. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. 

TDHT 114. American Musical Theatre (4)
The class will explore the musical’s origins, evolution, components, and innovators, with emphasis on adaptation and the roles of the director and choreographer. No prior knowledge in theatre history is needed. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. 

TDHT 115. History and Theory of Directing (4)
Evolution of directing theory from 1850 to the present with reference to the work of internationally influential directors such as Saxe-Meiningen, Antoine, Stanislavski, Meyerhold, Brecht, and Brook, among others. No prior knowledge in theatre history is needed. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. 

TDHT 119. Production Dramaturgy (4)
Introduces theatre and dance students to the practice of contemporary production dramaturgy. Students learn strategies for applying the results of textual analysis and cultural research to the production process. Prerequisites: interview required.

TDHT 120. Indigenous Theatre and Performance (4)
This theoretical and embodied course examines a selection of indigenous plays and performances (dance, hip-hop) and helps students develop the critical vocabulary and contextual knowledge necessary to productively engage with the political and artistic interventions performed by these works. No prior knowledge in theatre history is needed. Students may not receive credit for both TDHT 120 and ETHN 163G. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. 

TDHT 190. The New York Theatre and Dance Scene (4)
Experience firsthand New York history as a performing arts cultural capital. In addition to studying New York performance history and literature, attend performances accompanied by lecture/discussion. Get backstage tours, meet important players, and learn how productions go from vision to reality. Program or materials fees may apply. Contact the Department of Theatre and Dance for application for TDHT 190. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: Students must submit an application to enroll in the course to confirm they are aware course is in New York and will accrue additional fees.

TDMV 1. Beginning Ballet (4)
A contemporary approach to beginning-level ballet technique, principles, and terminology. Develops the body for strength, flexibility, and artistic interpretation. Emphasis on developing a foundation in movement for the continuation of ballet training. Historical origin of ballet will be discussed. May be taken for credit six times. Prerequisites: none.

TDMV 2. Beginning Contemporary Dance (4)
Introduction to contemporary somatic approaches to dance, building fundamental technical skills, kinetic and perceptual awareness, efficiency, and artistic expression. Choreographic sequences are analyzed through time space coordination and dynamics. Movement exploration includes improvisation and composition. May be taken for credit six times. Prerequisites: none.

TDMV 3. Beginning Jazz (4)
Introduction to the technique of jazz dance, while placing the art form in its historical context as an American vernacular form. Builds a beginning technical jazz vocabulary with a focus on rhythmic exercises, isolations, turns, and locomotor combinations. May be taken for credit six times. Prerequisites: none.

TDMV 5. Yoga for Dance (4)
An introduction to the physical practice of yoga. A detailed investigation into the ancient somatic practice of energetically connecting the mind and body through kinesthetic and sensory awareness and how this supports and informs dance practices. May be taken for credit six times. Prerequisites: none.

TDMV 11. Theatrical Tap (4)
The study of theatrical tap dance. Various styles of tap— such as classical, rhythm, and musical theatre—will be introduced. Emphasis on rhythm, coordination, timing, and theatrical style. Includes basic through intermediate tap movement. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: none.

TDMV 20. Movement Laboratory (4)
This creative laboratory course facilitates group and individual experimentation through the study of somatic movement processes and methodologies. Students explore approaches to movement vocabulary that offer them insights into investigating their own movement generation and dance making material. May be taken for credit six times. Prerequisites: none.

TDMV 110. Intermediate Ballet (4)
Continued studio work in ballet technique at the intermediate level and terminology. Emphasis on increasing strength, flexibility, and balance, and the interpretation of classical musical phrasing. Includes proper alignment training and artistic philosophy of classical ballet. May be taken for credit six times. Prerequisites: TDMV 1 or consent of instructor.

TDMV 111. Advanced Ballet (4)
A contemporary approach to ballet technique, terminology, and performance at the advanced level. Introduces more complex choreographic variations and skills. Individual and group composition will be examined and aesthetic criticism applied. May be taken for credit six times. Prerequisites: twelve units of TDMV 110 or consent of instructor.

TDMV 112. Advanced Ballet for Contemporary Dance (4)
Designed for students with advanced training in contemporary modern dance and intermediate to advanced training in ballet. Emphasis is on increasing composition and performance skills in ballet through contemporary modern dance aesthetics. May be taken for credit six times. Prerequisites: twelve units of THDA 101A-B-C or TDMV 111 or consent of instructor.

TDMV 120. Intermediate Contemporary Dance (4)
The development of contemporary dance as an expressive medium, with emphasis on technical skills at the intermediate level. Includes the principles, elements, and historical context of contemporary modern postmodern dance. May be taken for credit six times. Prerequisites: six units of TDMV 2 or consent of instructor.

TDMV 122. Advanced Contemporary Dance (4)
The development of contemporary somatic approaches to dance as an expressive medium, emphasizing advanced technical skills, efficient athleticism, kinesthetic refinement, individual creative voice, and performance elements. Choreography and aesthetic concepts will be explored. Incorporates various principles of human movement research. May be taken for credit six times. Prerequisites: twelve units of TDMV 120 or consent of instructor.

TDMV 123. Contact Improvisation (4)
Students will study the practice of improvisational dancing with a partner. Students will develop skills in giving and supporting body weight, lifting, balancing, falling, rolling, and recovering fluidly together. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

TDMV 130. Intermediate Jazz (4)
Designed to provide training in the technique of jazz dance, while placing the art form in its historical context as an American vernacular form. Builds an intermediate technical jazz level with a focus on style, musicality, dynamics, and performance. May be taken for credit six times. Prerequisites: TDMV 3 or consent of instructor.

TDMV 133. Advanced Jazz Dance (4)
Further development in the technique of jazz dance, while placing the art form in its historical context as an American vernacular form. Builds an advanced technical jazz level with a focus on style, musicality, dynamics, and performance. May be taken for credit six times. Prerequisites: TDMV 130 or consent of instructor.

TDMV 138. Beginning Hip-Hop (4)
An introduction to the basic technique of hip-hop, studied to enhance an understanding of the historical cultural content of the American form hip-hop and street dances in current choreography. May be taken for credit four times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

TDMV 140. Beginning Dances of the World (4)
Courses designed for the in-depth study of the dances and historical context of a particular culture or ethnic form: Afro-Cuban, Spanish, Balinese, Japanese, Latin, etc. Specific topic will vary from quarter to quarter. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

TDMV 141. Advanced Dances of the World (4)
Courses designed for the advanced continuing study of the dances and historical context of a particular culture or ethnic form: Afro-Cuban, Spanish, Balinese, Japanese, Latin, etc. Specific topic will vary from quarter to quarter. Prerequisites: THDA 132 or TDMV 136 or TDMV 142 or TDMV 143 or TDMV 144, or consent of instructor.

TDMV 142. Latin Dance of the World (4)
To develop an appreciation and understanding of the various Latin dances. Emphasis on learning basic social dance movement vocabulary, history of Latin cultures, and use of each dance as a means of social and economic expression. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

TDMV 143. West African Dance (4)
An introductory course that explores the history of West African cultures and diasporas through student research, oral presentation, dance movement, and performance. Contemporary African dances influenced by drum masters and performing artists from around the world are also covered. Course materials and services fees may apply. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

TDMV 144. Asian Dance (4)
To develop an appreciation and understanding of the dances from various Asian cultures. Emphasis on learning the basic forms and movement vocabularies, their historical context, and the use of each dance as a means of cultural and artistic expression. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

TDMV 146. Intermediate Latin Dances of the World (4)
To develop an appreciation and understanding of the various Latin dances. Emphasis on learning intermediate social dance movement vocabulary, history of Latin cultures, and use of each dance as a means of social and economic expression. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: TDMV 142.

TDMV 148. Intermediate Hip-Hop (4)
This course is designed to build on the skills developed in TDMV 138, Hip-Hop, also deepening students’ understanding of the social, political, and economic forces at work within hip-hop culture. More complex rhythms and sequencing will be introduced, and musicality will be honed through an added emphasis on freestyle expression. May be taken for credit four times. Prerequisites: TDMV 138.

TDMV 149. Advanced Hip-Hop (4)
Develops hip-hop skills at the advanced level with further studies of the social, political, and economic forces at work within hip-hop culture. Emphasis is on complex rhythms and sequencing, freestyle expression, choreography, and performance. May be taken for credit six times. Prerequisites: TDMV 138 or consent of instructor.

TDMV 190. Major Project as Performer (4)
An in-depth investigation of the role and aesthetics of performer/dancer in a fully staged independent project resulting in a dance performance choreographed by faculty or students. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and consent of instructor.

TDPF 160. Studies in Performance—Fall Production (2–6)
The in-depth study for a fully staged fall dance production directed and choreographed by faculty, graduate students, and/or guest artists in collaboration with student performers. Admission by audition only. May be taken for credit up to six times for a maximum of twelve units. Prerequisites: audition; department approval; concurrent enrollment in TDMV 110, 111, 112, 120, 122, 130, or 133.

TDPF 161. Studies in Performance—Winter Production (2–6)
The in-depth study for a fully staged winter dance production directed and choreographed by faculty and/or guest artists in collaboration with student performers. Admission by audition only. May be taken for credit up to six times for a maximum of twelve units. Prerequisites: audition, department approval, concurrent enrollment in TDMV 110 or TDMV 111 or TDMV 112 or TDMV 120 or TDMV 122 or TDMV 130 or TDMV 133.

TDPF 162. Studies in Performance Spring Production (2–6)
A full spring production featuring the original choreographic work of undergraduate dance students, developed under the mentorship and direction of a faculty member. Admission by audition only. May be taken for credit up to six times for a maximum of twelve units. Prerequisites: audition, department approval, concurrent enrollment in TDMV 110 or TDMV 111 or TDMV 112 or TDMV 120 or TDMV 122 or TDMV 130 or TDMV 133.

TDPF 163. Dance Repertory (2–6)
The study and aesthetic examination of major choreographic works by dance faculty or distinguished guest artists. Students will experience the creative process, staging, production, and performance of a complete dance work in conjunction with a conceptual study of its form and content. Audition is required. May be taken for credit up to six times for a maximum of twelve units. Prerequisites: concurrent enrollment in TDPF 160.

TDPF 190. Major Project/Dance Production (4)
Students develop skills in directing and producing an independent staged dance concert/production in various settings. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: department stamp required.

TDPR 6. Theatre Practicum (4–6)
A production-oriented course that introduces the student to technical fundamentals of costumes, scenery, lighting, and sound for the theatre. Students will be assigned to participate on a crew for a fully mounted theatrical production supported by the department. Prerequisites: must have department stamp.

TDPR 102. Advanced Theatre Practicum (4–6)
A production performance-oriented course that continues the development of costume, lighting, scenery, or sound production and introduces greater responsibilities in the laboratory format. Students serve as crew heads on major departmental productions or creative projects. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: THPR or TDPR 1, 2, 3, or 5; permission of instructor; department stamp required.

TDPR 104. Advanced Practicum in Stage Management (2–6)
A production performance-oriented course that continues the development of stage management skills and introduces greater responsibilities in the laboratory format. Students serve as either assistant stage managers on main stage productions or stage managers on studio projects. May be taken for credit up to six times for a maximum of twelve units. A maximum of eight total units may be used towards major requirements. Prerequisites: TDDR 101 and consent of instructor.

TDPW 1. Introduction to Playwriting (4)
Beginning workshop in the fundamentals of playwriting. Students discuss material from a workbook that elucidates the basic principles of playwriting, do exercises designed to help them put those principles into creative practice, and are guided through the various stages of the playwriting process that culminate with in-class readings of the short plays they have completed. Prerequisites: none.

TDPW 101. Intermediate Playwriting (4)
A workshop where students present their plays at various stages of development for group analysis and discussion. Students write a thirty-minute play that culminates in a reading. Also includes writing exercises designed to stimulate imagination and develop writing techniques. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: THPW or TDPW 1 or consent of instructor.

TDPW 102. Advanced Playwriting (4)
Advanced workshop where students study the full-length play structure and begin work on a long play. Students present their work at various stages of development for group discussion and analysis. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: THPW or TDPW 101 or consent of the instructor.

TDPW 104. Screenwriting (4)
Basic principles of screenwriting using scenario composition, plot points, character study, story conflict, with emphasis on visual action and strong dramatic movement. May be taken for credit two times. Prerequisites: THPW or TDPW 1.

TDPW 190. Major Project in Playwriting/Screenwriting (4)
For the advanced student in playwriting/screenwriting. This intensive concentration in the study of playwriting and/or screenwriting will culminate in the creation of a substantial length play. A maximum of eight units of major project study, regardless of area (design, directing, stage management, playwriting) may be used to fulfill major requirements. Applicants must have completed the playwriting sequence, THPW or TDPW 1, 101, and/or consent of instructor. See department for application form. Prerequisites: THPW or TDPW 1 and THPW or TDPW 101.

TDTR 10. Introduction to Dance (4)
An overview of dance, examining its social and cultural history and its evolution as an art form. Focus is on dance and its many genres as an expressive medium and form of communication. Prerequisites: none.

TDTR 15. Dance Movement and Analysis (4)
An overview and analysis of movement theory systems that offer approaches that improve movement quality, prevent injuries, aid in habilitation, develop mental focus and kinesthetic control, establish a positive body language, and develop vocabulary for creative research. Prerequisites: none.

TDTR 20. Dance on Film (4)
The study of dance on film and video, the evolution of the creation, filming, editing, and production of dance for the camera. Major dance film works will be analyzed and discussed from choreography in the movies to dances made for film. Prerequisites: none.

TDTR 104. Dance Theory and Pedagogy (4)
The study of the theoretical aspects of dance education, including an analysis of movement concepts for all ages. Development of basic technique training in all forms, curriculum planning, social awareness, and problem solving. Fundamental elements of cognitive and kinetic learning skills. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

TMC 1. First Year Experience (2)
This course facilitates academic success at a leading research university by helping students understand and embrace academic and curricular expectations, engage and map cocurricular opportunities, and strengthen critical thinking and organizational, interpersonal, and wellness skills. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: open to Marshall College first-year students only.

TMC 2. Transfer Year Experience (2)
This course facilitates academic success at a leading research university by helping students understand and embrace academic and curricular expectations, engage and map cocurricular opportunities, and strengthen critical thinking and organizational, interpersonal, and wellness skills. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: open to Marshall College transfer students only.

TMC 15. Introduction to Public Service in America (4)
This course is designed to study, discuss, and analyze the history and current role of public service in the United States. Students will be introduced to the different roles held by the three sectors of the American economic structure (government, business, and nonprofit/public service) with opportunity to provide a critical analysis of those roles within American society.

TMC 20. Thurgood Marshall College Honors Seminar (1)
Weekly seminar conducted by UC San Diego faculty and distinguished guest lecturers on topics related to the core curriculum: diversity, justice, and imagination. P/NP grades only.

TMC 90. Undergraduate Seminar (1)
These seminars are designed to expose undergraduate students, especially first-year students and sophomores, to exciting research conducted by UC San Diego faculty. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: none.

TMC 120. Partnership Schools Program Service-Learning Experience (4)
This service-learning experience guides undergraduates in achieving a critical and reflective understanding of the impact of historical, systemic, and institutionalized inequities on educational opportunities for underrepresented students. Undergraduates contribute to educational equity efforts by volunteering as tutors or interns at a UC San Diego Partnership School. These schools prepare first-generation youth for higher education by providing a rigorous college preparatory culture and curriculum. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

TMC 198. Thurgood Marshall College Directed Group Studies (4)
Directed group studies of a creative project. Designated for TMC students to work as a group on a project supervised by faculty; not included in regular curriculum, where group emphasis would be more beneficial and constructive than individual special studies. Prerequisites: upper-division standing (ninety units) including lower-division writing requirement (DOC 2 and DOC 3), minimum overall GPA of 2.5 and consent of instructor.

TMC 199. Marshall College Special Project (1–4)
Individual, independent research, or creative work intended to satisfy Marshall College graduation requirement. Designated for Marshall College students, topics are supervised by Marshall faculty in association with the honors seminar and honors projects. A written application describing the project is required. See Office of the Provost. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: upper-division students with 2.5 GPA and ninety units and approval of the provost or faculty designee. Honors standing required for honors projects.

USP 1. History of US Urban Communities (4)
This course charts the development of urban communities across the United States both temporally and geographically. It examines the patterns of cleavage, conflict, convergence of interest, and consensus that have structured urban life. Social, cultural, and economic forces will be analyzed for the roles they have played in shaping the diverse communities of America’s cities.

USP 2. Urban World System (4)
Examines cities and the environment in a global context. Emphasizes how the world’s economy and the earth’s ecology are increasingly interdependent. Focuses on biophysical and ethicosocial concerns rooted in the contemporary division of labor among cities, Third World industrialization, and the post-industrial transformation of US cities.

USP 3. The City and Social Theory (4)
An introduction to the sociological study of cities, focusing on urban society in the United States. Students in the course will examine theoretical approaches to the study of urban life; social stratification in the city; urban social and cultural systems–ethnic communities, suburbia, family life in the city, religion, art, and leisure.

USP 4. Introduction to Geographic Information Systems (4)
This course provides an entry-level introduction to Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and using GIS to make decisions: acquiring data and organizing data in useful formats, demographic mapping, and geocoding.

USP 5. Introduction to the Real Estate and Development Process (4)
This course introduces students to the terminology, concepts, and basic practices of real estate finance and development. It surveys real estate law, appraisal, marketing, brokerage, management, finance, investment analysis, and taxation.

USP 6. Introduction to Global Architecture (4)
Architecture and design shape our interaction with the built environment. This course covers history of built forms, including iconic work of well-known architects, with emphasis on global movements and power. Why did some ideas and forms travel, while others didn’t?

USP 15. Applied Urban Economics for Planning and Development (4)
This course explores how economics contributes to understanding and solving urban problems using a “learn by doing” approach. Economic analysis will be applied to important issues that planners and developers must deal with, such as land markets, housing, and zoning.

USP 25. Real Estate and Development Principles and Analysis (4)
This course will analyze the concepts related to the planning, development, leasing, valuation, and financing of real estate. There will be special emphasis on critical thinking and analytical decision-making by solving real estate problems primarily using Excel and Argus.

USP 30. Urban Studies and Planning Colloquium (2)
In this course, students will attend weekly seminars presented by leading researchers and practitioners in fields related to urban studies and planning. Students will learn about best practices and innovative case studies from the field.

USP 50. Real Estate and Development Colloquium (2)
In this course, students will attend weekly seminars presented by leading researchers and practitioners in the field of real estate and development. Students will learn about best practices and innovative case studies from the field. Recommended for students interested in the real estate and development minor or major.

USP 100. Introduction to Urban Planning (4)
This course is designed to provide an introduction to the fundamentals of urban planning. It surveys important topics in urban planning, including economic development, urban design, transportation, environmental planning, housing, and the history of urban planning. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 101. Introduction to Policy Analysis (4)
(Same as POLI 160AA.) This course will explore the process by which the preferences of individuals are converted into public policy. Also included will be an examination of the complexity of policy problems, methods for designing better policies, and a review of tools used by analysts and policy makers. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 102. Urban Economics (4)
(Same as ECON 135.) Economic analysis of why and where cities develop, patterns of land use in cities, why cities sub-urbanize, and the pattern of urban commuting. The course also examines problems of urban congestion, air pollution, zoning, poverty, and crime, and discusses public policies to deal with them. Credit not allowed for both ECON 135 and USP 102. Prerequisites: ECON 2 or 100A and MATH 10A or 20A.

USP 104. Ethnic Diversity and the City (4)
(Same as ETHN 105.) This course will examine the city as a crucible of ethnic identity exploring both the racial and ethnic dimensions of urban life in the United States from the Civil War to the present. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 105. Urban Sociology (4)
(Same as SOCI 153.) Introduces students to the major approaches in the sociological study of cities and to what a sociological analysis can add to our understanding of urban processes. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 106. The History of Race and Ethnicity in American Cities (4)
(Same as HIUS 129.) This class examines the history of racial and ethnic groups in American cities. It looks at major forces of change such as immigration to cities, political empowerment, and social movements, as well as urban policies such as housing segregation. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 107. Urban Politics (4)
(Same as POLI 102E.) This survey course focuses upon the following six topics: the evolution of urban politics since the mid-nineteenth century; the urban fiscal crisis; federal/urban relationships; the “new” politics; urban power structure and leadership; and selected contemporary policy issues such as downtown redevelopment, poverty, and race. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 110. Advanced Topics in Urban Politics (4)
(Same as POLI 102J.) Building upon the introductory urban politics course, the advanced topics course explores issues such as community power, minority empowerment, and the politics of growth. A research paper is required. Students may not receive credit for both POLI 102J and USP 110. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 120. Urban Planning, Infrastructure, and Real Estate (4)
This course will explore the interrelationships of urban planning, public infrastructure, and real estate development. These three issues are critical to an examination of the major challenges facing California’s and America’s major metropolitan centers. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 121. Real Estate Law and Regulation (4)
Examination of regulation of real estate development, as it affects landowners, developers and others private sector actors. Includes underlying public policies, establishment and enforcement of laws and regulations, application of regulations to individual projects, and political considerations in implementing regulations. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 122. Redevelopment Planning, Policymaking, and Law (4)
This course examines key elements of land use, planning, and law as related to urban redevelopment. It focuses on San Diego case studies, including the Petco Park/East Village redevelopment project and the Naval Training Center (NTC) Redevelopment Area (Liberty Station). Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 123. Law, Planning, and Public Policy (4)
Examination of the intersection of law and policy, in the form of processes and institutions, as they affect decision-making and program implementation in urban planning and design. Opportunities and constraints in making law and policy. Application to specific case examples. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 124. Land Use Planning (4)
Introduction to land use planning in the United States: zoning and subdivision, regulation, growth management, farmland preservation, environmental protection, and comprehensive planning. May be coscheduled with USP 224. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 125. The Design of Social Research (4)
Research methods are tools for improving knowledge. Beginning with a research question, students will learn to select appropriate methods for sampling, collecting, and analyzing data to improve their research activities and research results. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 126. Comparative Land Use and Resource Management (4)
This course evaluates alternative land use, regulatory, and land transfer approaches to the US regime. Considered are overseas reform models for comprehensive land use and resource management and their effects on environmental justice, resource sustainability, and management efficiency and innovation. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 128A. Climate Action Scholars: Community Engagement and Research (6)
(Same as ANTH 128A.) This course series will examine the historical, structural, and cultural roots of the climate crisis, its effects across diverse communities and ecologies, and the creative ways local people respond and build collective resilience. In this first quarter, students will engage in hands-on research, mapping, and documentation of climate change and associated social, environmental, and health impacts. Students will not receive credit for both USP 128A and ANTH 128A. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and departmental approval.

USP 128B. Climate Action Scholars: Capstone Project (6)
(Same as ANTH 128B.) In the second course of this series, students will deepen and apply their knowledge of the diverse ways the climate crisis manifests and interacts with local conditions and histories of inequity and injustice. Students will continue to participate in collaborative learning and community-based research. In addition, they will develop and implement a capstone “climate action project” in collaboration with local community partners. Students will not receive credit for both USP 128B and ANTH 128B. Prerequisites: ANTH 128A or USP 128A.

USP 131. Culture, Tourism, and the Urban Economy: Case Studies of Craft Breweries
Craft breweries are emerging as a significant part of the economy in US cities. This course examines the rise and impact of craft breweries in city life with a focus on tourism, urban culture, local job growth, and urban revitalization. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 132. African Americans, Religion, and the City (4)
(Same as ETHN 188.) This course details the history of African American migration to urban areas after World War I and World War II and explores the role of religion in their lives as well as the impact that their religious experiences had upon the cities in which they lived. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 133. Social Inequality and Public Policy (4)
(Same as SOCI 152.) Primary focus on understanding and analyzing poverty and public policy. Analysis of how current debates and public policy initiatives mesh with alternative social scientific explanations of poverty. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 135. Asian and Latina Immigrant Workers in the Global Economy (4)
(Same as ETHN 129.) This course will explore the social, political, and economic implications of global economic restructuring, immigration policies, and welfare reform on Asian and Latina immigrant women in the United States. We will critically examine these larger social forces from the perspectives of Latina and Asian immigrant women workers, incorporating theories of race, class, and gender to provide a careful reading of the experiences of immigrant women on the global assembly line. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 136. Community Organizing (4)
Provides an overview of community organizing and considers organizing as both a tactical and strategic approach to effective community building and leadership development. Examines how various communities have approached collaborative leadership, organizing, and community building. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 137. Housing and Community Development Policy and Practice (4)
History, theory, and practice of US housing and community development. Public, private, and nonprofit sectors shape and implement planning and policy decisions at the federal, state, local and neighborhood levels. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 138. Urban Economic Development (4)
This course focuses on strategies that policy makers and planners use in their efforts to foster healthy economies. Topics include theories of urban economic development, analytical techniques for describing urban economies, and the politics and planning of economic development. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 140. Healthy Placemaking (4)
This course introduces students to the concept and practice of “placemaking”—a collaborative process for creating public spaces that are vibrant, equitable, inclusive, and salutogenic. Students will gain an understanding of healthy placemaking as a strategy for building a more just and sustainable society. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 141A. Life Course Scholars Research and Core Fundamentals
This course introduces students to major concepts, demographic trends, and the diversity of the aging experience. Through site visits, community-based research, and interactions with elders, students will understand the social and structural determinants of health and well-being across the life course. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and department approval.

USP 141B. Life Course Scholars Capstone Project
In this course, students deepen and apply their knowledge of policy, research, practice, and diverse perspectives on aging. Students participate in collaborative learning and research with local elders, and develop and implement a capstone “healthy aging project” in the community. Prerequisites: successful completion of USP 141A.

USP 142A. Urban Challenges: Homelessness in San Diego Core Fundamentals (4)
This course introduces students to the complexity of homelessness from multiple perspectives including the homeless population itself, service providers, policymakers, community members, and researchers. In addition to classroom learning, students will have the unique opportunity for experiential, place-based learning off campus. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and department approval.

USP 142B. Urban Challenges: Homelessness in San Diego Fieldwork (6)
In this course, students will deepen and apply their knowledge of policy, research, practice, and diverse perspectives on homelessness. Students will learn and apply different research methodologies as they conduct faculty-supervised fieldwork on different dimensions of the homelessness crisis. Prerequisites: USP 142A and upper-division standing.

USP 142C. Urban Challenges: Sustainable Food Systems (4)
This course explores diverse elements of sustainable food systems planning for cities and their hinterlands. We will review the deep inequalities and impacts of food systems while uncovering a diversity of local solutions at different scales, including our own campus. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 143. The US Health-Care System (4)
This course will provide an overview of the organization of health care within the context of the community with emphasis on the political, social, and cultural influences. It is concerned with the structure, objectives, and trends of major health and health-related programs in the United States to include sponsorship, financing, training and utilization of health personnel. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. (Offered winter quarter.)

USP 144. Environmental and Preventive Health Issues (4)
This course will analyze needs of populations, highlighting current major public health problems such as chronic and communicable diseases, environmental hazards of diseases, psychiatric problems and additional diseases, new social mores affecting health maintenance, consumer health awareness and health practices, special needs of economically and socially disadvantaged populations. The focus is on selected areas of public and environmental health, namely: epidemiology, preventive services in family health, communicable and chronic disease control, and occupational health. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. (Offered fall quarter.)

USP 145. Aging—Social and Health Policy Issues (4)
This course will provide a brief introduction to the nature and problems of aging, with emphasis on socioeconomic and health status; determinants of priorities of social and health policies will be examined through analysis of the structure and organization of selected programs for the elderly. Field visits will constitute part of the course. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 147. Case Studies in Health-Care Programs/Poor and Underserved Population (4)
The purpose of this course is to identify the special health needs of low income and underserved populations and to review their status of care, factors influencing the incidence of disease and health problems, and political and legislative measures related to access and the provision of care. Selected current programs and policies that address the health-care needs of selected underserved populations such as working poor, inner city populations, recent immigrants, and persons with severe disabling mental illnesses will be studied. Offered in alternate years. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. (Offered spring quarter.)

USP 148. Health and the Built Environment (4)
This course focuses on the relationship between the design of home, work, and recreational environments and our health. Evidence shows that our environments impact our engagement in health promoting or adverse behavior and the exposure to both positive and negative stimuli. May be coscheduled with USP 248. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 150. Real Estate and Development Law and Regulation (4)
This course reviews the legal issues, processes, and institutions involved in real estate. Topics include principles of real property law, legislative and judicial institutions, land use and environmental regulation, financial instruments, property transactions, and forms of investment and development entities. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 151. Real Estate Planning and Development (4)
This course covers the methods and procedures utilized in development from inception to completion. Topics include initial planning, project feasibility and decision-making, partnerships, financing, design, entitlement and approvals, site acquisition, construction management, project completion, leasing, and asset management. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 152A. Real Estate Development Finance and Investment (4)
This course investigates the institutions, instruments, and structures by which investment in real estate is financed. It reviews capital markets, the sources and uses of real estate funds, and the role of government in real estate finance. Renumbered from USP 152. Students may not receive credit for USP 152A and USP 152. Prerequisites: USP 25.

USP 152B. Advanced Real Estate Development Finance and Investment (4)
The course will examine various case studies of real-life development and investment projects, including apartments, acquisition of a distressed project, office development, land development, and student housing. The students will also incorporate zoning analysis and joint venture structures into the case studies where appropriate. Prerequisites: USP 152 or USP 152A.

USP 153. Real Estate and Development Market Analysis (4)
This course examines the analysis of demand for real estate products and site-specific real estate development projects. Consideration is given to relevant factors such as economic change, social attitudes, and changing laws. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 155. Real Estate Development in Global and Comparative Perspective (4)
This course compares real estate markets in Asia, Europe, the Middle East, and Latin America. It explores the factors that affect these regions’ real estate economies including finance in city systems, emerging markets, development trends, demographic shifts, and urban planning. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 158A. Advanced Special Topics in Real Estate and Development (4)
Topics may include the analysis of particular projects; policy issues such as building codes, environmental regulation, and public-private partnerships; or the relationships among real estate, financial markets, and communities. Topics may vary. May be taken for credit up to three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 159A. NAIOP Real Estate University Challenge I (4)
In this course, students will work together in teams to complete a development proposal for a real world location provided by the San Diego chapter of the Commercial Real Estate Development Association (NAIOP). Students will meet with industry professionals to evaluate the most feasible, highest, and best use of space on the site provided. May be taken for credit up to two times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and department approval.

USP 159B. NAIOP Real Estate University Challenge II (2)
In this course, students will work together in teams to complete a development proposal for a real world location provided by the San Diego chapter of the Commercial Real Estate Development Association (NAIOP). Students will meet with industry professionals to evaluate the most feasible, highest, and best use of space on the site provided. May be taken for credit up to two times. Prerequisites: USP 159A and upper-division standing.

USP 160. Research Methods: Analyzing Crime (4)
This course will cover the methods and context for analyzing crime at national, state, regional, and micro-place levels. Methods will be both qualitative and quantitative as well as include primary and secondary data analysis. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 161. Environmental Design and Crime Prevention (4)
This course is an introduction to theories and concepts relating to the built and natural environment and crime prevention. Perspectives from planners and criminologists will be discussed, and a real-world project will be used to integrate theory into practice. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 162. Migration and the City (4)
How do local and global power dynamics shape migration and immigrant inequality? In this course, students learn how capitalism, state and local policies, and climate change shape migration. They also discuss how urban politics, economic contexts, border enforcement, and policing drive (or mitigate) immigrant inequalities. Finally, students look at how immigrants organize and reshape the cities they are in, with a focus on Latinos in Southern California and at the US-Mexico border. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 163. Community-Based Research and Planning (4)
This course prepares students to engage in community-based research and planning with a focus on social justice. Students consider the power dynamics between scholars, planners, and vulnerable groups of people. They discuss the ethics and effectiveness of participatory approaches, as well as their tensions. They train in trauma-informed data collection. Finally, they reflect on their own roles in society, campus, and various communities for self-awareness and self-care. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 164. Cities in Film (4)
This course examines global cities through the lens of film, exploring how urban environments have been represented by filmmakers and imagined by communities. Students engage with urban theory and interrogate the meaning of places tied to history, culture, and architecture. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 165A. Advanced Special Topics in Housing (4)
Special topics may include the analysis of particular housing developments; policy issues such as affordable housing, home finance, or fair housing law; or social issues such as displacement or housing inequality. Topics will vary. May be taken for credit up to three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 165B. Advanced Special Topics in Sustainability (4)
Topics may include issues such as sea level rise, water conflicts, sustainable food systems; also public or private strategies for sustainable development such as green building or climate action planning. Topics will vary. May be taken for credit up to three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 165C. Advanced Special Topics in Transportation (4)
Transportation topics may include policies such as congestion pricing, transit districts, street parking, or road safety regulation; social and legal implications of new transportation technologies; or methods for analyzing transit behavior. Topics may vary. May be taken for credit up to three times. May be coscheduled with USP 265C. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 165D. Advanced Special Topics in Urban Design and Land Use (4)
Topics may include the analysis of particular landscapes or designs; policy tools such as inclusionary zoning, transit-oriented development, or community benefits agreements; or effects of the built environment, construed broadly. Topics may vary. May be taken for credit up to three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 167. History of New York City (4)
(Same as HIUS 123.) New York City breathes history. Whether it is in the music, the literature, or the architecture, the city informs our most basic conceptions of American identity. This course examines the evolution of Gotham from the colonial era to today. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 168. History of Los Angeles (4)
(Same as HIUS 117.) This course examines the history of Los Angeles from the early nineteenth century to the present. Particular issues to be addressed include urbanization, ethnicity, politics, technological change, and cultural diversification. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 169. Introduction to Green Building (4)
Introduction to green building including the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) rating system which explores sustainable strategies in the built environment including site, energy, water, materials, waste, and health. Develops a general understanding of concepts and prepares students for the LEED GA exam. Prerequisites: USP 124 and upper-division standing.

USP 170. Planning for Sustainable Communities (4)
This course will explore the different factors and processes that shape a sustainable city. Contemporary green planning techniques and values will be evaluated. The course will also discuss planning, designing, and implementation of sustainable facilities that will reduce sprawl. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 171. Sustainable Development (4)
Sustainable development is invoked by a wide range of actors and sectors that seek to promote environmentally sound and socially just approaches to economic development. This course critically examines the diverse, and often contradictory, definitions and applications of sustainability throughout the world. May be coscheduled with USP 271. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 171GS. International Sustainable Development (4)
Sustainable development is a broad concept that encompasses efforts to promote environmentally sound approaches to economic, social, and physical development. This course provides a critical, transdisciplinary overview of emergent theories and practices of sustainability in an international comparative context. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and department approval.

USP 172. Graphics, Visual Communication, and Urban Information (4)
This course examines the use of graphic techniques and tools to explain research, data analysis, and convey ideas with a focus on the built environment. Visual communication for planners/designers using traditional graphic media, electronic media, and visualization are explored. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 173. History of Urban Planning and Design (4)
The analysis of the evolution of city designs over time; study of the forces that influence the form and content of a city: why cities change; comparison of urban planning and architecture in Europe and the United States. Students may not receive credit for USP 173 and USP 173GS. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 173GS. History of Urban Planning and Design (4)
The analysis of the evolution of city designs over time; study of the forces that influence the form and content of a city; why cities change; comparison of urban planning and architecture in Europe and the United States. Students may not receive credit for USP 173GS and USP 173. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and department approval.

USP 175. Site Analysis (4)
Introduction to the theory and practice of context-sensitive site analysis, including regulatory framework, site inventory, site selection and programming, and conceptual design. Demonstrates use of planning and development tools to conduct suitability analysis and project visualization in real world settings. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 176. International Planning and Development: U.S.-Mexico Border (4)
This course explores globalization, cross-border design, and urban planning along international boundaries. The California-Baja California border serves as a laboratory to rethink transborder land use, transport, environmental justice, immigration, port of entry design, ecological management, security, and economic development. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 177A. Urban Design Practicum (4)
This course is designed to introduce the student to the theory and practice of urban design, the form of the built environment, and how it is created. There is an emphasis on the development within a larger urban context. Renumbered from USP 177. Students may not receive credit for USP 177A and USP 177. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 177B. Advanced Urban Design (4)
Settlement patterns, design of streets and open space, buildings, and civic space are the setting for public life. This course explores how we design and inhabit cities that are increasingly more populated and dense. Advanced design research, drawing skills required. Prerequisites: USP 177, USP 177A, or USP 179.

USP 179. Urban Design, Theory, and Practice (4)
Roles of the urban designer, preparing schematic proposals and performance statements, identifying opportunities for and constraints on designers. Each student will prepare a practical exercise in urban design using various urban design methods. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 180. Transportation Planning (4)
Introduction to the history and current state of urban transportation planning, including the relationship between transportation and urban form; role of automotive, mass transit, and alternative modes; methods for transportation systems analysis; decision-making, regulatory, and financing mechanisms; and public attitudes. May be coscheduled with USP 280. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 181. Public Transportation (4)
Livable cities rely on balanced transportation systems that can mitigate the negative impacts of car-oriented environment and society. This course will explore the role of public transit in creating a balanced transportation system. A variety of public transportation systems will be analyzed. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 182. Gentrification (4)
“Gentrification” refers to the migration of relatively affluent people into less affluent and working-class neighborhoods. We will discuss the differences between gentrification, reinvestment, and urban renewal; the causes of gentrification; and its effects on the businesses and residents. We will also examine the role of public policy in encouraging gentrification or mitigating its most harmful consequences. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 183. The Geography of American Opportunity (4)
(Same as SOCI 183.) How does where you grow up affect where you end up? This course explores “who gets what where and why,” by examining spatial inequalities in life chances across regions, rural and urban communities, and divergent local economies in the U.S. We will “place” places within their economic, socio-cultural, and historical contexts. Readings and exercises will uncover spatial variation in inequalities by race/ethnicity, immigrant status, gender, class, and LGBTQIA status that national averages obscure. Students may not receive credit for SOCI 183 and USP 183. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 183GS. International Urban Design Practicum (4)
This course will take place in Germany and will introduce the student to the theory and practice of urban design in a global setting. There is an emphasis on the built environment, and how it is created and shaped within an international context. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and department approval.

USP 184. Decolonizing Design: Histories and Theories (4)
How can indigenous ecological knowledges and forms of sovereignty inform decolonial design? Case studies include the architectural, urban, and environmental histories of the “Indian New Deal” in the 1930s and its legacies, and contemporary proposals for a Green New Deal. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 185A. Real Estate Finance and Development Studio I (4)
This course introduces students to the challenges of developing and financing real property. Students work in teams to prepare a proposal for a complete site-specific project that incorporates real estate finance, development, and design. Prerequisites: USP 124, USP 151, USP 152, and USP 153. Restricted to seniors within the Real Estate and Development major.

USP 185B. Real Estate Finance and Development Studio II (4)
An intensive studio-based experience that culminates in a completed group project that analyzes, evaluates, and presents a site-specific real estate finance and development proposal. The final project includes market analysis, pro forma financial analysis, site analysis, and site design. Prerequisites: USP 185A.

USP 186. Senior Sequence Research Proposal (6)
Introduces students to the theory and practice of social research including the challenges of writing a scholarly proposal. Students are required to complete one hundred hours of an internship experience while critically examining the relations between social science and society. Prerequisites: USP 124, one USP technical elective, and one USP Research Methods course. Restricted to seniors within the Urban Studies and Planning major.

USP 187. Senior Sequence Research Project (6)
An intensive research, internship, and writing experience that culminates in an original senior research project. Students learn about the theoretical, ethical, and technical challenges of scholarly research and publication. Prerequisites: USP 186.

USP 188. Field Research in Migrant Communities—Practicum (8)
(Same as SOCI 188) Mexican Migration Field Research Program: Students work closely with faculty to conduct direct on-the-ground field research in a migrant community. Students work as teams, conducting either surveys, interviews, or ethnographic observations. Students are expected to produce an outline of a research paper based on the results from fieldwork. Conversational fluency in Spanish is recommended. Students will not receive credit for both SOCI 188 and USP 188. Prerequisites: SOCI 133.

USP 188B. Research Analysis and Reporting (4)
This course is a workshop in which students analyze original data and write a major public-facing research report. Students gain experience translating research for broader audiences. Covers the structure of reports, policy and advocacy audiences, and how to present findings. Prerequisites: USP 188 or consent of instructor.

USP 189. Special Topics in Urban Planning (4)
An undergraduate course designed to cover various aspects of Urban Planning. May be taken for credit up to two times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

USP 190. Senior Honors Seminar (4)
Each student enrolled will be required to write an honors essay, a substantial research paper on a current urban policy issue, under the supervision of a member of the faculty. Most often the essay will be based on their previous fieldwork courses and internship. This essay and other written exercises, as well as class participation, will be the basis of the final grade for the course. The seminar will rotate from year to year among the faculty in urban studies and planning. Prerequisites: USP 186, USP 187, major GPA 3.5, and permission of instructor.

USP 191A. Intermediate GIS for Urban and Community Planning (4)
Intermediate geographic information systems (GIS) as applied to urban studies builds upon the introductory course and teaches students how to use the GIS software, collect and analyze data, and produce maps and products relating to demographics, transportation, health, public safety, and other current issues. Prerequisites: USP 4 and upper-division standing.

USP 191B. Advanced GIS for Urban and Community Planning (4)
Advanced geographic information systems (GIS) as applied to urban studies. Learn to use the GIS software with a focus on data management, online GIS, elements of spatial statistics, technologies, and models for spatial data integration to support urban research and decision-making. Prerequisites: USP 191A and upper-division standing.

USP 193. San Diego Community Research (4)
Using the San Diego region as a case study, students will be introduced to the process of collecting, evaluating, and presenting urban and regional data using a variety of methods, including aggregate data analysis, historical research, and ethnography. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.

USP 194. Research Seminar in Washington, DC (4)
(Same as COGS 194, COMM 194, HITO 193, POLI 194, SOCI 194, SIO 194.) Course attached to six-unit internship taken by students participating in the UCDC Program. Involves weekly seminar meetings with faculty and teaching assistant and a substantial research paper. Prerequisites: department approval and participating in UCDC Program.

USP 195. Teaching Apprentice—Undergraduate (2–4)
Introduction to teaching activities associated with course. Responsibilities include preparing reading materials assigned by the instructor, attending course lectures, meeting at least one hour per week with the instructor, assisting instructor in grading, and preparing a summary report to the instructor. May be taken for credit up to three times for a maximum of eight units. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.

USP 198. Directed Group Study in Urban Studies (2–4)
Directed group study on a topic or in a field not included in the regular departmental curriculum by special arrangement with a faculty member. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and consent of instructor.

USP 199. Independent Study in Urban Studies (2–4)
Reading and research programs and field-study projects to be arranged between student and instructor, depending on the student’s needs and the instructor’s advice in terms of these needs. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and consent of instructor.

VIS 1. Introduction to Art Making: Two-Dimensional Practices (4)
An introduction to the concepts and techniques of two-dimensional art making with an emphasis on drawing. Lectures and studio classes will introduce skills and concepts of contemporary drawing practice in relation to a variety of genres such as illustration, comics, advertising, animation, and other forms of visualization. This course is offered only one time each year. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 2. Introduction to Art Making: Motion and Time-Based Art (4)
An introduction to art making utilizing the transaction between people, objects, situations, and media. Includes both critical reflection on relevant aspects of modern and contemporary art practices (Marina Abramovic, Allen Kaprow, Adrian Piper, James Luna, Stelarc, Ron Athey, conceptual art, performance art, new media art, etc.) and practical experience in a variety of artistic exercises. This course is offered only one time each year. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 3. Introduction to Art Making: Three-Dimensional Practices (4)
An introduction to art making that uses as its base the idea of the “conceptual.” The lecture exists as a bank of knowledge about various art world and nonart world conceptual plays. The studio section attempts to incorporate these ideas into individual and group projects using any “material.” This course is offered only one time each year. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 6. Race, Gender, and Robots (4)
We will look at works that present androids, cyborgs, and AI as an emergent “other” in media. Examining science fiction films and media, students look critically at how race and gender are represented. Through the lens of feminist and antiracist scholarship, the course presents critical understandings of android/AI stories and their cultural implications. Special emphasis throughout the course will be placed on how such stories remake troubling histories and anxieties about race and gender. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 7. Movie Magic: From Méliès to Marvel (4)
Looking at spectacle in motion pictures, the illusion of cinema, and visual effects in popular media. This class will introduce students to the history of special and visual effects in film and video, from the earliest cinematic experiments to experimental film and modern-day blockbusters. We will examine the integration of technology with image-making and storytelling and look at the exciting ways artists make the impossible come alive on screen. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 8. Visuality and the African Diaspora (4)
This seminar introduces students, with an academic background in critical theories of race and ethnicity, to artistic production in the visual arts. It combines practice-based research with theoretical and historical readings of works by scholars, artists, and filmmakers of the African diaspora. Prerequisites: AAS 10.

VIS 9. Introduction to Digital Photography for Non-Majors (4)
This course is a general study of the camera and photography utilizing digital technology. Emphasis is placed on developing fundamental manual control, understanding composition, and basic photographic techniques through lectures and field exercises. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 10. Computing in the Arts Lecture Series (4)
Designed around presentations by visiting artists, critics, and scientists involved with contemporary issues related to computer arts and design. Lectures by the instructor and contextual readings provide background material for the visitor presentations. Program or materials fees may apply. Students may not receive credit for both VIS 10 and ICAM 110. This course is offered only one time each year. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 11. Introduction to Visual Culture (4)
This course examines the significant topics in art practice, theory, and history that are shaping contemporary art thinking. A wide range of media extending across studio art practice, digital media, performative practices, and public culture will be considered as interrelated components. This course is offered only one time each year during winter quarter. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 20. Introduction to Art in Europe and America (4)
This course examines the history of Western art and architecture through such defining issues as the respective roles of tradition and innovation in the production and appreciation of art; the relation of art to its broader intellectual and historical contexts; and the changing concepts of the monument, the artist, meaning, style, and “art” itself. Representative examples will be selected from different periods, ranging from antiquity to modern. Content will vary with the instructor. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 21A. Introduction to the Art of the Americas or Africa and Oceania (4)
Course offers a comparative and thematic approach to the artistic achievements of societies with widely divergent structures and political organizations from the ancient Americas to Africa and the Pacific Islands. Topics vary with the interests and expertise of instructor. Students may not receive credit for VIS 21 and VIS 21A. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 21B. Introduction to Asian Art (4)
Survey of the major artistic trends of India, China, and Japan, taking a topical approach to important developments in artistic style and subject matter to highlight the art of specific cultures and religions. Students may not receive credit for VIS 21 and VIS 21B. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 21C. Introduction to African Art (4)
Survey of the major artistic trends of Africa, taking a topical approach to important developments in artistic style and subject matter to highlight the art of specific cultures, nations, and religions. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 22. Formations of Modern Art (4)
A wide-ranging survey introducing the key aspects of global art and criticism in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The course will comparatively examine formations of modernism and modernity within and across a variety of aesthetic traditions in Africa, Asia, Europe, Latin America, North America, and Oceania. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 23. Seminar in Art History Methods (4)
This course, a lower-division seminar for art history majors, covers the research tools and fundamental skills needed for advanced work in the field. Topics include descriptive and analytical writing; revision and peer review; compiling annotated bibliographies with traditional and online resources, indexes, and databases; evaluating source materials (including those found online); defining research programs; and preparing and delivering art history presentations. Prerequisites: none. Art history majors only.

Note: Prerequisite for VIS 112 and highly recommended for all other seminars. Must be taken within a year of declaring major or transferring into the art history program.

VIS 30. Introduction to Speculative Design (4)
Speculative design uses design methods to question and investigate material culture with critical creative purpose. This course provides a historical, theoretical, and methodological introduction to speculative design as a distinct program. Emphasis is tracing the integration of interdisciplinary intellectual and technical problems toward creative, unexpected propositions and prototypes. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 31. Undead Media: All Things Zombie (4)
Have you noticed that zombies are everywhere? In the lab, bank, your home, computer, and cell phone. The undead threaten identity and civilization. Who are they? What do they want? How do they “think”? What do they mean? Class will consider film, literature, graphic novels, video games, and fan culture, drawing from fields such as computing, anthropology, philosophy, sexuality studies, and ethnic studies to dig up undead media’s secret histories and map the global flows of its shambling hordes. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 32. Art, Design, and the Brain (4)
Neuroscience is a fast-growing biology field, with projects such as the White House BRAIN Initiative and the Allen Brain Atlas and new areas such as neuroeconomics, neurophilosophy, and neuroaesthetics. This lecture course considers interactions between neuroscience and art, primarily focusing on studies of how art is represented in the brain. By considering perception, emotion, memory, and creativity, we approach scientific understandings of art and design. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 41. Design Communication (4)
This course provides a strong foundation in contemporary techniques of design communication, introduced in light of their significance to visual culture and the speculative design field. We cover digital image editing, typography, vector-based illustration and diagramming, and document layout. Also introduced are basic digital video editing tools and web production formats. Emphasis is on mastery of craft through iteration and presentation of multiple projects. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 60. Introduction to Digital Photography (4)
An in-depth exploration of the camera and image utilizing photographic digital technology. Emphasis is placed on developing fundamental control of the processes and materials through lectures, field, and lab experience. Basic discussion of image making included. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: none. Open to visual arts majors and minors.

VIS 70N. Introduction to Media (6)
Operating as both a lecture and production course, this introductory class provides a technical foundation and theoretical context for all subsequent production-oriented film and video studies. In the laboratory, the student will learn the basic skills necessary to initiate video production. Completion of Visual Arts 70N is necessary to obtain a media card. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: none. Open to visual arts majors and minors.

VIS 80. Introduction to the Studio Major (4)
A practical introduction to the studio art major and a conceptual introduction to how diverse strategies of art making are produced, analyzed, and critiqued. Introduces historical and contemporary topics in painting, drawing, sculpture, installation, and performance art and field-based practices. Required for all studio majors and minors including transfer students. Must be taken in residence at UC San Diego. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 83. Photographic History (4)
Course examines the broader history of photography. We will discuss various technological processes associated with the early dissemination of photography and explore the ways in which this new medium transformed existing social and cultural practices, primarily in Europe and the United States during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. We will examine photographic artists, as well as photographers working in a range of areas, from criminology and advertising to journalism and war photography. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 84. Film History (4)
A survey of the history and the art of the cinema. The course will cover a range of national and international cinemas from the origins of cinema and the contributions of the earliest filmmakers to film movements and styles of the late twentieth century. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 84B. Film Aesthetics (4)
Analysis and interpretation of a film movement, style, genre, or set of conventions in light of aesthetic, philosophical, and/or theoretical frameworks. Specific films and emphases may vary by year and instructor. Examples include early twentieth-century avant-garde, Third Cinema, Neorealism, documentary cinema, the New Waves, essay films, science and cinema, cinematic landscapes, structuralist film. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 85A. Media History (4)
A survey of media history and theory across a range of national and international contexts. Offers historically situated analysis of print, audio, text-based, image-based, and time-based media art and design in narrative, avant-garde, and documentary forms across different movements, genres, and styles with attention to associated theories and conventions (such as mechanical, electronic, graphical, lens-based, video, digital, and mixed media). Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 85B. Media Aesthetics (4)
Analysis and interpretation of a specific media art or design movement, style, genre, or set of conventions in light of aesthetic, philosophical, and/or theoretical frameworks. Specific works and emphases may vary by year and instructor. Examples include video art of the 1970s and 80s, photographic strategies, media art and industry, media archaeology, and computational aesthetics. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 87. First-year Seminar in Visual Arts (1)
The First-year Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. First-year Seminars can be offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students with preference given to entering first-year students. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 100. Introduction to Public Culture (4)
This course examines contemporary theories and concepts of public culture and social practice, including new spheres of public culture design research and practice that intervene across urban socioeconomic and political domains, environmental, spatial and community-based dynamics, architecture, information design, and visualization. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 100A. Design of Public Culture (4)
This course will explore and develop designs and strategies that engage today’s shifting public domain structures and their various spatial and systematic manifestations. The problematic of “the public” and the politics of public sphere are situated as sites of investigation through which we imagine new interfaces between individuals, collectives, and institutions with the aim of coproducing more critical and inclusive forms of public space and culture. Prerequisites: VIS 100.

VIS 101. Introduction to Urban Ecologies (4)
This course introduces expanded meanings of the urban and the ecological into new conceptual zones for artistic practice and research. It introduces urbanization as a set of complex and transformative processes of interrelated cultural, socioeconomic, geopolitical, and environmental conditions whose material and informational flows generate the designs and meanings of cities as an ecological system. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 101A. Designing Urban Ecologies (4)
This course will explore and develop designs and strategies that use multi-scalar urban and ecological systems as materials for artistic intervention and design speculation on structures including shifting geopolitical boundaries, sociocultural territories, and urban infrastructures and landscapes. Through hands-on research and design projects, we explore the city and its multiple sites of investigation to develop new ecologies of social and cultural productions. Prerequisites: VIS 101.

VIS 102. Democratizing the City (4)
This course provides an introduction to the Tijuana-San Diego border, seeing it as a microcosm of global conflict from where to engage urban inequality and explore new approaches to democratize the city. The course zooms into the border flows that make the marginalized neighborhoods within this contested geography into sites of social-economic and cultural productivity, laboratories in which to rethink the gap between wealth and poverty. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 103. Architectural Practices (4)
We can learn a lot from the spatial, aesthetic, and formal strategies of architects, as well as their critical stance on the shifting cultural, socio-political, and economic dynamics in the contemporary city. This is an introductory course to explore some of the most important, innovative contemporary architectural practices in the world, and their role in shaping new paradigms in design, material, urban, and environmental culture. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 103A. Contemporary Arts in South Korea (4)
The course examines the theories and practices of contemporary art in South Korea. Highlighting the work of representative artists, we consider the role of the arts in modernization, the emergence of alternative arts spaces that promote the decentralization of cultural programs, and how governmental and corporate sponsorship has supported the national and global presence of South Korean art. This course is part of the Korean studies minor program. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 103B. Architecture and Urbanism of Korea (4)
Covering the evolution of architecture and urban developments in South and North Korea since 1953, and focusing on their capital cities of Seoul and Pyongyang, this course considers how both states have shaped their political, economic, and cultural conditions. In particular, we will compare the differences in designs of apartment complexes, architecture of national identity, and political and corporate buildings between the two nations, and the hybridization of traditional and modern styles. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 103C. Silk Roads: A Critical Study (4)
A cultural, cartographic, and geo-political overview of the dialects of the East and the West and the convergent civilizations in between, this course will examine the historical precedents and contemporary reconstructions of Europe and Asia as one continent. We will explore how the networks and territories; and the movements of materials, ideas, and people through the Silk Roads have shaped and will shape the morphology of Eurasia over its space and time, including religions, technologies, and trades. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 103D. History of Speculative Design: Projects, Programs, and Practices (4)
This course surveys the history of speculative design in a planetary context, introducing students to important and diverse projects and design practices. These may include experimental architecture, science fiction literature, speculative software design, critical object and installation, philosophy of technology, alternative futures, graphical and interaction design, and more. Emphasis will be on understanding projects and practices in historical, cultural, and political context. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 105A. Drawing: Representing the Subject (4)
A studio course in beginning drawing covering basic drawing and composition. These concepts will be introduced by the use of models, still life, landscapes, and conceptual projects. Prerequisites: VIS 80.

VIS 105B. Drawing: Practices and Genre (4)
A continuation of VIS 105A. A studio course in which the student will investigate a wider variety of technical and conceptual issues involved in contemporary art practice related to drawing. Prerequisites: VIS 105A.

VIS 105C. Drawing: Portfolio Projects (4)
A studio course in drawing, emphasizing individual creative problems. Class projects, discussions, and critiques will focus on issues related to intention, subject matter, and context. Prerequisites: VIS 105B.

VIS 105D. Art Forms and Chinese Calligraphy (4)
This course treats Chinese calligraphy as a multidimensional point of departure for aesthetic, cultural, and political concerns. This conceptually based course combines fundamental studio exercises with unconventional explorations. Students are exposed to both traditional and experimental forms of this unique art and encouraged to learn basic aesthetic grammars. There are no Chinese language requirements for this course. Prerequisites: VIS 80.

VIS 105E. Chinese Calligraphy as Installation (4)
This course concerns East–West aesthetic interactions. What are the conceptual possibilities when calligraphy, an ancient form of Chinese art, is combined with installation, a contemporary artistic Western practice? Emphasis is placed on such issues as cultural hybridity, globalization, multiculturalism, and commercialization. Prerequisites: VIS 105D.

VIS 106A. Painting: Image Making (4)
A studio course focusing on problems inherent in painting—transferring information and ideas onto a two-dimensional surface, color, composition, as well as manual and technical procedures. These concepts will be explored through the use of models, still life, and landscapes. Prerequisites: VIS 80.

VIS 106B. Painting: Practices and Genre (4)
A continuation of VIS 106A. A studio course in which the student will investigate a wider variety of technical and conceptual issues involved in contemporary art practice related to painting. Prerequisites: VIS 106A.

VIS 106C. Painting: Portfolio Projects (4)
A studio course in painting emphasizing individual creative problems. Class projects, discussions, and critiques will focus on issues related to intention, subject matter, and context. Prerequisites: VIS 106B.

VIS 107A. Sculpture: Making the Object (4)
A studio course focusing on the problems involved in transferring ideas and information into three-dimensions. Course will explore materials and construction as dictated by the intended object. Specific problems to be investigated will be determined by the individual professor. Prerequisites: VIS 80.

VIS 107B. Sculpture: Practices and Genre (4)
A studio course in which the student will investigate a wider variety of technical and conceptual issues as well as materials involved in contemporary art practice related to sculpture. Prerequisites: VIS 107A.

VIS 107C. Sculpture: Portfolio Projects (4)
A studio course in sculpture emphasizing individual creative problems. Class projects, discussions, and critiques will focus on issues related to intention, subject matter, and context. Students may not receive credit for both VIS 107C and VIS 107CN. Prerequisites: VIS 107B.

VIS 108. Advanced Projects in Art (4)
This is a studio art course for the advanced visual arts major. After guided assignments, emphasis is on self-directed projects and portfolio development. This interdisciplinary course may focus on painting, drawing, sculpture, performance, film, video, photography, and new media. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: senior standing. Open to media, studio, ICAM, and speculative design majors.

VIS 110A. Contemporary Issues and Practices (4)
This course for the advanced visual arts major examines topics in contemporary studio art practice. The course is divided among research, discussion, projects, field trips to galleries, and visiting artists, and will encourage student work to engage in a dialogue with the issues raised. Prerequisites: senior standing. Open to media, studio, ICAM, and speculative design majors.

VIS 110B. Professional Practice in the Visual Arts (4)
This class is for the advanced visual arts major who is interested in taking the next steps toward becoming a professional visual artist. Students will become familiar with artist’s residencies and graduate programs and what they offer. Of most importance will be developing the portfolio and the artist statement, as well as becoming more familiar with the contemporary art world. Two production-based limitation. Prerequisites: senior standing. Open to media, studio, ICAM, and speculative design majors.

VIS 110C. Proposals, Plans, Presentations (4)
This is a course for the advanced visual arts major that explores the use of the maquette, or sketch, in the process of developing, proposing, and planning visual works in various media for public projects, site specific works, grants, exhibition proposals, etc. The student will work on synthesizing ideas and representing them in alternate forms that deal with conception, fabrication, and presentation. Prerequisites: senior standing. Open to media, studio, ICAM, and speculative design majors.

VIS 110D. Visual Narrative (4)
This course for the advanced visual arts major explores the role of storytelling in art practice across a variety of disciplines including drawing, painting, sculpture, and performance. Prerequisites: senior standing. Open to media, studio, ICAM, and speculative design majors.

VIS 110E. Art in Public Spaces/Site-Specific Art (4)
This course for the advanced visual arts major takes painting, sculpture, and related media out of the studio/gallery and into the public sphere by examining the contemporary history of public artworks with traditional and nontraditional site-specific work, focusing on production, critical discussion, and writing. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: senior standing. Open to media, studio, ICAM, and speculative design majors.

VIS 110F. Installation: Cross-Disciplinary Projects (4)
This course for the advanced visual arts major expands the idea contained in a singular work, or object, into the use of multiple objects, images, and media that redefines the idea as well as the space for which it is intended. Examination of historic, modern, and contemporary works will influence discussion of student project development and execution. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: senior standing. Open to media, studio, ICAM, and speculative design majors.

VIS 110G. The Natural and Altered Environment (4)
This course for the advanced visual arts major explores the natural and altered environment as a basis for subject as well as placement of work pertaining to the environment. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: senior standing. Open to media, studio, ICAM, and speculative design majors.

VIS 110H. Art and Text (4)
This class is for the advanced visual arts major devoted to the study and practice of the multiple ways in which writing and other forms of visible language have been incorporated into contemporary and traditional artworks, including artists’ books, collaging and poster art, literature and poetry, typographical experiments, and calligraphies. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: senior standing. Open to media, studio, ICAM, and speculative design majors.

VIS 110I. Performing for the Camera (4)
This is a studio art course for the advanced visual arts major that explores the relationship between performance and the camera. From the selfie, performance documentation, and directing actors, this course explores standing in front of, between, and behind the lens. Prerequisites: senior standing.

VIS 110K. Digital Studio (4)
This is a studio art course for the advanced visual arts major with a focus on the intersection of digital rendering and drawing, painting, sculpture, and performance. Structured as core lectures and labs, studio production, reading, and critical theory focused on contemporary art engaged with technology, as well as artists’ responses to its demands. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: senior standing. Open to media, studio, ICAM, and speculative design majors.

VIS 110M. Studio Honors I (4)
This is a course for the advanced studio major who is selected based on a proven record of engagement, productivity, and self-discipline as well as a clear trajectory of their work. The intent is to help refine and expand the student’s studio practice toward a unified portfolio and artist’s statement as well as develop experience in participation and organization of group and solo exhibitions. Prerequisites: consent of the instructor, department stamp required.

VIS 110N. Studio Honors II (4)
The second advanced studio course in the Honors Program in Studio, the successful completion of which will lead toward an honors degree in the studio major. The course builds on the critical and technical issues raised in Studio Honors I. Prerequisites: VIS 110M.

VIS 112. Theories and Methods (4)
Introduction for art history majors to a wide range of critical and theoretical approaches to the image and to key methodologies of art history, including iconography, formalism, psychological theories of art, social art history, feminism, and de/postcolonialism. Emphasis will be on developments in the nineteenth–twenty-first centuries; students with research interests in early or premodern periods are encouraged to use the methodological resources we develop to address these areas and issues. Required for all art history and criticism majors. Prerequisites: VIS 23.

VIS 113AN. History of Criticism I: Early Modern (4)
Using a wide range of nineteenth-century texts, this course will offer close discussions of romantic criticism and aesthetic philosophy (ideas of originality, genius, and nature); the conditions of “modern life”; realism and naturalism; science and photography; and questions of form, expression, symbolism, and history. This is a seminar course. Recommended preparation: two upper-division art history courses. Prerequisites: VIS 112.

VIS 113BN. History of Criticism II: Early Twentieth Century (1900–1950) (4)
The principal theories of art and criticism from symbolism until 1945: formalism and modernism, abstraction, surrealism, Marxism, and social art histories, phenomenology, existentialism. Recommended preparation: VIS 112 or two upper-division courses in art history strongly recommended. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 113CN. History of Criticism III: Contemporary (1950–Present) (4)
Recent approaches to the image in art history and visual culture: structuralism, semiotics, psychoanalysis, poststructuralism, postmodernism, feminism, postcolonialism, cultural studies. Recommended preparation: VIS 112 or two upper-division courses in art history strongly recommended. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 114A. Landscape and Memory (4)
This seminar treats landscape as site, image, symbol, and ideal through a historical examination of the major themes and issues in the forms and functions of landscape and its representation in the European and, to a certain extent, the American tradition from antiquity to the present day. These historical discussions will also form a framework for observations on and analyses of contemporary landscape, both as experienced and as an idea. This course presumes no prior knowledge of the field. This course fulfills the theory requirement and seminar requirement in the art history program. Recommended preparation: VIS 20. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 114B. The Fragment: Uses and Theories (4)
This seminar focuses on the dynamic and at times contentious relationship between antiquity and the Middle Ages as it played out in various environments—physical, social, cultural, and intellectual—from Rome to Constantinople to Venice, Pisa, and Florence. After considering classic and contemporary formulations of the problem, it turns to in-depth examination of the architecture, images, objects, and techniques at sites in the history of art, where fragments were deployed and displayed. This course fulfills the theory requirement and seminar requirement in the art history program. Recommended preparation: VIS 20 or VIS 112. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 114GS. Arts and Visual Culture in China (4)
This course studies important developments in the arts of China in the context of contemporary cultural phenomena. The factors behind the making of art will be brought to bear on selected objects or monuments from China’s great artistic eras. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor and department approval.

VIS 117E. Problems in Ethnoaesthetics (4)
This seminar will address and critique various approaches to studying the art of non-Western societies with respect to their own aesthetic and cultural systems. Students are encouraged to explore comparative philosophies of art and test paradigms of Western aesthetic scholarship. Recommended preparation: VIS 21A or 21B or 112 or two upper-division courses in art history strongly recommended. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 117F. Theorizing the Americas (4)
Examines the philosophical debates that locate the Americas in relation to the modern world. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 117G. Critical Theory and Visual Practice (4)
This seminar will examine key moments in the interaction between the world of art and the world of ideas; the goal is to start students thinking about the entire theory-practice relation as it connects with their own projects and research. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 117I. Western and Non-Western Rituals and Ceremonies (4)
This course will examine the process of image making within specific ceremonies and/or rituals. Selected ceremonies from West Africa, Melanesia, Nepal, and the United States, including both Christian and non-Christian imagery, will be considered. Performance art and masquerade will be analyzed within a non-Western framework. Recommended preparation: VIS 21A. Students may not receive credit for both VIS 126F and VIS 117I. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 120A. Greek Art (4)
Greek classical civilization was a turning point in the history of humanity. Within a new kind of society, the idea of the individual as free and responsible was forged, and with it the invention of history, philosophy, tragedy, and science. The arts that expressed this cultural explosion were no less revolutionary. The achievements of Greek art in architecture, sculpture, and painting will be examined from their beginnings in the archaic period, to their epoch-making fulfillment in the classical decades of the fifth century BC, to their diffusion over the entire ancient world in the age of Alexander and his successors. Recommended preparation: VIS 20. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 120B. Roman Art (4)
Roman art was the “modern art” of antiquity. Out of their Italic tradition and the great inheritance of Greek classic and Hellenistic art, the Romans forged a new language of form to meet the needs of a vast empire, a complex and tumultuous society, and a sophisticated, intellectually diverse culture. An unprecedented architecture of shaped space used new materials and revolutionary engineering techniques in boldly functional ways for purposes of psychological control and symbolic assertion. Sculpture in the round and in relief was pictorialized to gain spatial effects and immediacy of presence, and an extraordinary art of portraiture investigated the psychology while asserting the status claims of the individual. Extreme shifts of style, from the classicism of the age of Augustus to the expressionism of the third century AD, are characteristic of this period. The new modes of architecture, sculpture, and painting, whether in the service of the rhetoric of state power or of the individual quest for meaning, were passed on to the medieval and ultimately to the modern West. Recommended preparation: VIS 20. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 120C. Late Antique Art (4)
During the later centuries of the Roman Empire, the ancient world underwent a profound crisis. Beset by barbarian invasions, torn by internal conflict and drastic social change, inflamed with religious passion that was to lead to a transformed vision of the individual, the world, and the divine, this momentous age saw the conversion of the Roman world to Christianity, the transfer of power from Rome to Constantinople, and the creation of a new society and culture. Out of this ferment, during the centuries from Constantine to Justinian, there emerged new art forms fit to represent the new vision of an otherworldly reality: a vaulted architecture of diaphanous space, a new art of mosaic, which dissolved surfaces in light, a figural language both abstractly symbolic and urgently expressive. The great creative epoch transformed the heritage of classical Greco-Roman art and laid the foundations of the art of the Christian West and Muslim East for the next thousand years. Recommended preparation: VIS 20 or 120B. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 121AN. Art and Experience in the Middle Ages (4)
This survey course follows the parallel tracks of the sacred and secular in art and architecture from Constantine to the Crusades. Highlights include the emergence of Christian art, visual culture of the courts, development of monasteries, fall and rise of towns and cities, and arts of ritual. The thematic juxtaposition of different media and medieval people speaking in their own voices yields a multidimensional image of society in which the medieval experience is made as concrete as possible. Recommended preparation: VIS 20. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 121B. Church and Mosque: Medieval Art and Architecture between Christianity and Islam (4)
This course surveys the changes in art and architecture caused by the rise of new religions after the ancient world demise, a period of upheaval and contention often known as the “Clash of Gods.” How did Christianity come to dominate Europe with its churches and monasteries and then Islam with its mosques in the Middle East and North Africa? Studying the role of religion in the formation of artistic styles will show a dynamic interaction between the visual cultures of Christianity and Islam. Recommended preparation: VIS 20. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 121C. Art and the Bible in the Middle Ages: Sign and Design (4)
This course will look at the many different ways the Bible was deployed in medieval visual culture from images to architecture and from narrative and symbolism to ritual. Our path will be charted by the major monuments of medieval art that take up our theme of the Bible, which will serve as exemplary guideposts in our trajectory through the Middle Ages. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 121H. Medieval Multiculturalism (4)
This seminar explores movement and exchange between Mediterranean cities with diverse political, social, ethnic, and religious roots and the new modes of art, architecture, and intellectual discourse that this diversity fostered. In addition to medieval sources, readings include art historical and theoretical texts from a variety of periods and fields that frame the implications of multiculturalism for historical and contemporary categories of perception and for the analysis of visual culture. Recommended preparation: VIS 20 or VIS 112 recommended. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 122AN. Renaissance Art (4)
Italian artists and critics of the fourteenth through sixteenth centuries were convinced that they were participating in a revival of the arts unparalleled since antiquity. Focusing primarily on Italy, this course traces the emergence in painting, sculpture and architecture, of an art based on natural philosophy, optical principles, and humanist values, which embodied the highest intellectual achievement and deepest spiritual beliefs of the age. Artists treated include Giotto, Donatello, Masaccio, Brunelleschi, Jan van Eyck, Mantegna, Botticelli, Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, Raphael, Bramante, Durer, and Titian. Recommended preparation: VIS 20. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 122B. Baroque: Painters, Sculptors, Architects (4)
This course will explore the baroque, through the lens of the lives of artists and architects who made it great: Rembrandt, Vermeer, Velasquez, Bernini, and Caravaggio, as well as the artists of the sixteenth century who served as a source of inspiration and point of departure for the great work of the baroque. The lives of these people interlocked on a number of different levels in order to create a visual culture that many regard as fundamental to the modern world. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 122CN. Leonardo da Vinci in Context (4)
An in depth look at the art of Leonardo da Vinci with special emphasis on his training in Florence, interactions with Bramante, and the response to his work by Raphael. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 122D. Michelangelo (4)
This course offers new approaches to understanding Michelangelo’s greatest creations. By considering how each work relates to the setting for which it was intended, by regarding critical literature and artistic borrowings as evidence about the works, and by studying the thought of the spiritual reformers who counseled Michelangelo, new interpretations emerge which show the artist to be a deeply religious man who invested his works with both public and private meanings. Prerequisites: upper-division standing; or one of the following courses: VIS 20, 21, 22 or 23; or any upper-division course in art history and criticism or in European history.

VIS 122F. Leonardo’s La Gioconda (4)
A critical, art historical look at the world’s most famous painting and its interpretations. Recommended preparation: One upper-division course in art history (VIS 113AN–129F). Prerequisites: VIS 23.

VIS 122GS. The City in Italy (4)
(Cross-listed with HIEU 124GS.) Language and culture study in Italy. Course considers the social, political, economic, and religious aspects of civic life that gave rise to the unique civic art, the architecture of public buildings, and the design of the urban environment of such cities as Florence, Venice, or Rome. Course materials fees may be required. Students may not receive credit for both VIS 122E and VIS 122GS or both HIEU 124 and HIEU 124GS. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor and department approval.

VIS 123AN. Between Spirit and Flesh (4)
The art of the Early Renaissance in Northern Europe is marked by what appears to be striking conflict: on the one hand, a new love of nature and the pleasures of court society, and on the other, an intensified spirituality and focus on personal devotion. This course explores these provocative crosscurrents in works by master painters like Jan van Eyck and Hieronymus Bosch as well as in lesser known mass-produced objects of everyday use. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 123B. Contemporary Art of the African Diaspora (4)
A survey of contemporary art practices of Africa and the African diaspora with a focus on intersectionality and critical and decolonial theory. Particular attention will be drawn to international perennial exhibitions, non-traditional media, mixed media installation and performance, and curatorial practice. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 123C. Art and Visual Culture of the United States (4)
This course examines artistic and media production of the United States with an emphasis on political and social history. It focuses on the complex interrelation of visual representation with respect to the politics of settler-colonialism; nationhood; capitalism and consumerism; and ethnicity, gender, and sexual identity. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 124BN. Art and the Enlightenment (4)
Eighteenth-century artists and critics were convinced that art could be a force to improve society. This course places Rococo and neoclassical artists such as Watteau, Fragonard, Tiepolo, Hogarth, Reynolds, Vigée Le Brun, Blake, and David, within the context of art academies, colonialism, the Grand Tour, Enlightenment conceptualizations of history and nature, and the American and French Revolutions. Recommended preparation: VIS 20 or 22 recommended. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 124CN. Nineteenth-Century Art (4)
A critical survey discussing the crisis of the Enlightenment, romanticism, realism and naturalism, academic art and history painting, representations of the New World, the Pre-Raphaelites, impressionism, international symbolism, postimpressionism, and the beginnings of modernism. Recommended preparation: VIS 20 or 22 recommended. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 124D. Paris, Capital of the Nineteenth Century (4)
A cultural history of nineteenth-century Paris. Addresses how and why the cultural formations and developments of the period, and their inseparability from the city, have led so many to consider Paris the capital of modernity. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 124E. The Production of Nature (4)
Considers nineteenth-century European painting and printmaking in relation to the construction of nature and the historically specific ways of seeing that emerge from it. Key artists, groups of artists, include John Constable, J.M.W. Turner, Caspar David Friedrich, Camille Corot, the Barbizon School, J.-J. Grandville, the Pre-Raphaelites, and the Impressionists. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 124F. Art in the Age of Revolutions (4)
A critical study of European painting, sculpture, and printmaking between 1789 and 1851. Of primary interest will be the highly charged encounter between art and politics during the period. In addition, the course addresses this art’s diverse, often contradictory dealings with class, gender, sexuality, race, and empire. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 124G. Art and Modernity (4)
A critical study of mid- to late nineteenth-century painting, sculpture, and printmaking in Europe. Key artists, or groups of artists, include Gustave Courbet, the Pre-Raphaelites, Adolph Menzel, Edouard Manet, the Impressionists, the Neoimpressionists, Vincent van Gogh, Paul Gauguin, Paul Cézanne, the Nabis, Auguste Rodin, James Ensor, and others. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 125A. Twentieth-Century Art (4)
A critical survey outlining the major avant-gardes after 1900: fauvism, cubism, metaphysical painting, futurism, Dadaism, surrealism, neoplasticism, purism, the Soviet avant-garde, socialist realism, and American art before abstract expressionism. Recommended preparation: VIS 20 or 22 recommended. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 125BN. Contemporary Art (4)
Art after abstract expressionism: happenings, postpainterly abstraction, minimalism, performance, earth art, conceptual art, neo-expressionism, postconceptualism and development in the 1990s, including non-Western contexts. We also explore the relation of these tendencies to postmodernism, feminism, and ideas of postcoloniality. Recommended preparation: VIS 20 or 22 recommended. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 125C. Modern Art in the West, 1850–1950 (4)
What is the place of visual art in modern Western culture? This course will address visual art and radical politics in Courbet and the generation of 1848; Impressionism, Paris, and the cult of la vie moderne; Gauguin, Van Gogh, and the quest for “visionary” painting; Cezanne and the reformulation of painting in terms of pure sensation; the divergent paths of Matisse and Picasso in 1906. The twentieth century follows the emergence of different interpretations of modernity in the USSR, Germany, and France. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 125DN. Marcel Duchamp (4)
A critical examination of the work of one of the most radical twentieth-century artists. In Duchamp’s four-dimensional perspective, the ideas of art-object, artist, and art itself are deconstructed. The Large Glass and Etant Données are the twin foci of an oeuvre without boundaries in which many twentieth-century avant-garde devices such as chance techniques, conceptual art, and the fashioning of fictive identities, are invented. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 125E. Faces and Powers (4)
Examines the social and political effects of represented faces in classical, medieval, Renaissance, modern, and some non-Western contexts. We will look at the face of God, facial grotesques, pseudosciences such as physiognomy, and faces in anthropology, criminology, eugenics, and insanity. Discusses the distortion and erasure of the face in avant-garde art from 1850 to 1950; the celluloid face; and renegotiations with the face in phenomenological/existential thinking and recent identity politics. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 125G. History of Socially Engaged Art (4)
This course will present an overview of socially engaged art in the modern era. We will explore the historical roots of these practices in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries and the new forms of activist art that emerged during the 1960s. We will also explore the growth of engaged art produced in conjunction with new movements for social and economic justice since the 1990s. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 126AN. Pre-Columbian Art of Ancient Mexico and Central America (4)
An introduction to the cities and monuments of the ancient civilizations that flourished in Mexico and Central America before the Spanish Conquest. This course will cover the major cultures of Mesoamerica, including the Olmec, Aztec, and neighboring groups. Recommended preparation: VIS 21. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 126BN. The Art and Civilization of the Ancient Maya (4)
This course offers a history of Maya society from its formative stages to the eve of the Spanish Conquest through an investigation of its art and archeology. Special attention is given to its unique calendar and writing systems. Recommended preparation: VIS 21. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 126C. Problems in Mesoamerican Art History (4)
Topics of this seminar will address special problems or areas of research related to the major civilizations of ancient Mexico and Central America. Course offerings will vary to focus upon particular themes, subjects, or interpretive problems. Recommended preparation: VIS 21A. Students may not receive credit for both VIS 126B-C. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 126D. Problems in Ancient Maya Iconography and Inscriptions (4)
This seminar focuses upon the art, architecture, and inscriptions of the ancient Maya. Topics will vary within a range of problems that concern hieroglyphic writing, architecture, and visual symbols the Maya elite used to mediate their social, political, and spiritual words. Recommended preparation: VIS 21A. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 126E. Indigenisms I: The Making of the Modern, Nineteenth Century to Mid-Twentieth Century (4)
This course provides a critical revision to art history of the modern era in the Americas by bringing to the center, as an organizing principle, an expanded understanding and critique of the notion of indigenism. Presenting evidence that the constant iteration of the problem of representation of indigeneity and the indigenous is persistent across the region following a network of exchanges and contacts across art movements and political contexts. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 126F. Indigenisms II: Contemporary Disseminations, Neo-Avantgarde to the Present (4)
Lectures, readings, and discussions will expand the definitions of indigenism and Indianism toward many neo-avantgarde and contemporary strategies of art making that posit the Amerindian as inscription and imaginary—as key localizations from which new languages and art systems emerge. Examples of (neo) indigenisms from Peru, Mexico, the United States, Uruguay, Argentina, Chile, Ecuador, Venezuela, Guatemala, Colombia, and Brazil will be presented and reviewed. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 126HN. Pacific Coast American Indian Art (4)
Explores the art and expressive culture of American Indians of far western United States, including California and Pacific Northwest. Social and cultural contexts of artistic traditions and their relations to the lifeways, ceremonialism, beliefs, and creative visions of their makers. Recommended preparation: VIS 21A. Students may not receive credit for both VIS 126CN and VIS 126HN. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 126I. Southwest American Indian Art (4)
Examines the history, art, and architecture of Navajo, Hopi, Zuni, and other Native American communities of New Mexico and Arizona; the origins of their civilization; and how their arts survived, adapted, and changed in response to Euro-American influences. Recommended preparation: VIS 21A. Students may not receive credit for both VIS 126D and VIS 126I. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 126J. African and Afro-American Art (4)
The dynamic, expressive arts of selected West African societies and their subsequent survival and transformation in the New World will be studied. Emphasis will be placed on Afro-American modes of art and ceremony in the United States, Haiti, Brazil, and Suriname. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 126K. Oceanic Art (4)
An examination of the relation of art to ritual life, mythology, and social organization in the native Polynesian and Melanesian cultures of Hawaii, New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, and Australia. Recommended preparation: VIS 21A. Students may not receive credit for both VIS 126E and VIS 126K. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 126P. Latin American Art: Modern to Postmodern, 1890–1950 (4)
A survey of major figures and movements in Latin American art from the late-nineteenth century to the mid-twentieth century. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 126Q. Latin American Art: Modern to Postmodern, 1950–Present (4)
A survey of major figures and movements in Latin American art from the mid-twentieth century to the present. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 127B. Arts of China (4)
Course will survey major trends in the arts of China from a thematic point of view, explore factors behind the making of works of art, including political and religious meanings, and examine contexts for art in contemporary cultural phenomena. Recommended preparation: VIS 21B. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 127C. Arts of Modern China (4)
Course will explore Chinese art of the twentieth century. By examining artworks in different media, we will investigate the most compelling of the multiple realities that Chinese artists have constructed for themselves. Recommended preparation: VIS 21B. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 127D. Early Chinese Painting (4)
Explore representations of figures and landscapes from the dawn of Chinese painting through the Yuan dynasty, with stress on developments in style and subject matter and relationships to contemporary issues in philosophy, religion, government, society, and culture. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 127E. Later Chinese Painting (4)
Explores major schools and artists of the Ming and Qing periods, including issues surrounding court patronage of professional painters, revitalization of art through reviving ancient styles, commercialization’s challenges to scholar-amateur art, and the influences of the West. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 127F. Japanese Buddhist Art (4)
Explore the development of Buddhist art and architecture in Japan. Focus on the role of art in Buddhist practice and philosophy and the function of syncretic elements in Japanese Buddhist art. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 127GS. Issues in Modern and Contemporary Chinese Art (4)
This course investigates the multiple realities of art and visual culture in twentieth-century China and explores the ways in which Chinese artists have defined modernity and their tradition against the complex background of China’s history. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor and department approval.

VIS 127N. Twentieth-Century Art in China and Japan (4)
Surveys the key works and developments in the modern art and visual culture of Japan from Edo and Meiji to the present and of China from the early-twentieth century to contemporary video, performance, and installation art. Recommended preparation: VIS 21B. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 127P. Arts of Japan (4)
Course is a survey of the visual arts of Japan, considering how the arts developed in the context of Japan’s history and discussing how art and architecture were used for philosophical, religious, and material ends. Recommended preparation: VIS 21B. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 127Q. Japanese Painting and Prints (4)
Explore major trends in Japanese pictorial art from the seventh century to the nineteenth century, with focus on function, style, and subject matter, and with particular emphasis on the relationship between Japanese art and that of continental Asia. Prerequisites: none.

VIS 128A–E. Topics in Art History and Theory (4)
These lecture courses are on topics of special interest to visiting and permanent faculty. Topics vary from term to term and with instructor and many will not be repeated. These courses fulfill upper-division distribution requirements. As the courses under this heading will be offered less frequently than those of the regular curriculum, students are urged to check with the visual arts department academic advising office for availability and descriptions of these supplementary courses. Like the courses listed under VIS 129, below, the letters following the course number designate the general area in which the courses fall. Students may take courses with the same number but of different content, for a total of three times for credit. Recommended preparation: courses in art history (VIS 113AN–129F). Prerequisites: none.

VIS 128A. Topics in Premodern Art History (4)
A lecture course on a topic of special interest in ancient or medieval art. Recommended preparation: courses in art history (VIS 113AN–129F). Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 128B. Topics in Early Modern Art History (4)
A lecture course on a topic of special interest in renaissance or baroque art. May be taken three times for credit. Recommended preparation: courses in art history (VIS 113AN–129F). Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 128C. Topics in Modern Art History (4)
A lecture course on a topic of special interest on modern or contemporary art. May be taken three times for credit. Recommended preparation: courses in art history (VIS 113AN–129F). Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 128D. Topics in Art History of the Americas (4)
A lecture course on the topic of special interest in the art of Latin America, the Ancient Americas, or Africa and the Pacific Islands. Students may not receive credit for VIS 128D and VIS 128DN. Recommended preparation: courses in art history (VIS 113AN–129F). May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 128E. Topics in Art History of Asia (4)
A lecture course on the topic of special interest in India, China, and Japan. Recommended preparation: courses in art history (VIS 113AN–129F). Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 129A–F. Seminar in Art Criticism and Theory (4)
These seminar courses provide the opportunity for in-depth study of a particular work, artist, subject, period, or issue. Courses offered under this heading may reflect the current research interests of the instructor or treat a controversial theme in the field of art history and criticism. Active student research and classroom participation are expected. Enrollment is limited and preference will be given to majors. The letters following 129 in the course number designate the particular area of art history or theory concerned. Students may take courses with the same number but of different content more than once for credit, with consent of the instructor and/or the program adviser. May be taken three times for credit. Prerequisites: VIS 112 or two upper-division courses in art history.

VIS 129A. Seminar in Premodern Art History (4)
A seminar on an advanced topic of special interest in ancient or medieval art. Prerequisites: VIS 112 or two upper-division courses in art history (VIS 113AN–129F).

VIS 129B. Seminar in Early Modern Art History (4)
A seminar on an advanced topic of special interest in renaissance or baroque art. Prerequisites: VIS 112 or two upper-division courses in art history (VIS 113AN–129F).

VIS 129C. Seminar in Modern Art History (4)
A seminar on an advanced topic of special interest in modern or contemporary art. Prerequisites: VIS 112 or two upper-division courses in art history (VIS 113AN–129F).

VIS 129D. Seminar in Art History of the Americas (4)
A seminar on an advanced topic of special interest in the Ancient Americas to Africa and the Pacific Islands. May be taken three times for credit. Student may not receive credit for VIS 129D and VIS 129DN. Recommended preparation: courses in art history (VIS 113AN–129F) are recommended. VIS 112 is strongly recommended for art history majors. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 129E. Seminar in Art History of Asia (4)
A seminar on an advanced topic of special interest in India, China, and Japan. Prerequisites: VIS 112 or two upper-division courses in art history (VIS 113AN–129F).

VIS 129F. Seminar in Art Theory and Criticism (4)
A seminar on an advanced topic of special interest in art theory, art criticism, or the history of literature on art. Prerequisites: VIS 112 or two upper-division courses in art history (VIS 113AN–129F).

VIS 130. Special Projects in Visual Arts (4)
Specific content will vary each quarter. Areas will cover expertise of visiting faculty. May be taken for credit two times. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: senior standing or consent of instructor required. Open to media, studio, ICAM, and speculative design majors only.

VIS 131. Special Projects in Media (4)
Specific content will vary each quarter. Areas will cover expertise of visiting faculty. May be taken for credit two times. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: senior standing or consent of instructor required. Open to media, studio, ICAM, and speculative design majors only.

VIS 132. Installation Production and Studio (4)
Through discussions and readings, the class will examine the issues and aesthetics of installation art making. Using media familiar to them, students will produce several projects. May be taken for credit two times. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: senior standing or consent of instructor required. Open to media, studio, ICAM, and speculative design majors only.

VIS 133. Lecture Topics in Speculative Design (4)
A lecture course that examines a topic of special interest in speculative design that is not addressed in the regular curriculum. Students will read and write critically about the topic. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Open to media, studio, ICAM, and speculative design majors and speculative design minors.

VIS 133A. Studio Topics in Speculative Design (4)
A seminar that examines a topic of special interest in speculative design that is not addressed in the regular curriculum. Students will read, write, and produce work through projects. Prerequisites: VIS 30 or VIS 41. Open to media, studio, ICAM, and speculative design majors and speculative design minors.

VIS 134. Introduction to 3-D Asset Design (4)
This course teaches foundational skills in 3-D modeling, rendering, and animation to prepare students for specialized courses in architectural and urban design, virtual reality and augmented reality, virtual environments, computer gaming, character design, industrial design, and other applications. Emphasis is on a general understanding of widely used software and development of projects in an artistic and design context. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 135. Design Research Methods (4)
This course introduces students to studio-based project methodologies, including qualitative and quantitative design research, data visualization, production and exhibition methodologies, and complex collaborative project management. Prerequisites: VIS 30 and 41.

VIS 136A. Speculative Fiction Seminar (4)
This course approaches writing as a research-based design of a text. We research, design, and write futuristic and historical texts that draw on fiction but also take other forms. To inform the writing, we read, view, and analyze works of speculative fiction and fantasy, graphic novels, supernatural fiction, alternative history, science fiction, counterfactual history, and systems novels, a form dedicated to interpreting a world increasingly structured through information systems and technology. Prerequisites: VIS 30. Open to media, studio, ICAM, and speculative design majors and speculative design minors.

VIS 141A. Computer Programming for the Arts I (4)
Introduces external APIs currently of interest in the arts, extending a common programming language such as C, C++, Python, or Java, and the basics of TCP/IP networking. Students gain API fluency through planning and coding software or software mediated art projects. Program or materials fees may apply. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 142 and CSE 11 or CSE 8B. Open to ICAM and speculative design majors and computing and the arts and speculative design minors.

VIS 141B. Computer Programming for the Arts II (4)
Students extend their programming capabilities to include the creation of reusable software libraries, packages, database APIs, tools, utilities, and applications intended to be publishable and useful to other practicing artists, or as preparatory work for the student’s senior thesis sequence. Two production-course limitation. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: VIS 141A. Open to ICAM and speculative design majors and minors only.

VIS 142. Practices in Computing Arts (4)
A survey of the conceptual uses and historical precedents for the use of computers in art and design. Preparation for further study in the computing in the arts area by providing an introduction to ideation strategies and critique-based evaluation, and an overview of theoretical issues related to the use of computers by artists and designers. Introduces the students to the program’s computing and production facilities, and basic computer programming skills. Two production-course limitation. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 143. Virtual Environments (4)
Students develop artworks and performances in current virtual environments. Projects may be done individually or in groups in multiplayer games, immersive life platforms, or mixed reality projects and performances. Exploration of theoretical issues involved will underlie acquisition of techniques utilized in the construction of virtual environments. Materials fees required. Prerequisites: VIS 142; CSE 11 recommended. Open to visual arts majors and ICAM minors only. Two production-course limitation.

VIS 145A. Time- and Process-Based Digital Media I (4)
Introduces time- and process-based digital media art making. Contemporary and historical works across time- and process-based media will be studied, and projects produced. Topics may include software art, software and hardware interfacing, interaction, and installation in an art context. Recommended preparation: CSE 5A or equivalent programming experience. Materials fees required. May not receive credit for both VIS 145A and ICAM 102. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 142. Open to ICAM and speculative design majors and computing and the arts and speculative design minors.

VIS 145B.Time- and Process-Based Digital Media II (4)
Students will implement time- and process-based projects under direction of faculty. Projects such as software and hardware interfacing, computer mediated performance, software art, installation, interactive environments, data visualization and sonification will be produced as advanced study and portfolio project. Program or materials fees may apply. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 145A or ICAM 102. Open to ICAM and speculative design majors and computing and the arts and speculative design minors.

VIS 147A. Electronic Technologies for Art I (4)
Develop artworks and installations that utilize digital electronics. Techniques in digital electronic construction and computer interfacing for interactive control of sound, lighting, and electromechanics. Construction of devices that responsively adapt artworks to conditions involving viewer participation, space activation, machine intelligence. Recommended preparation: CSE 8A strongly recommended. Program or materials fees may apply. Purchase of components kit required. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 41 or VIS 70N or VIS 80. Open to media, studio, ICAM, and speculative design majors and computing and the arts and speculative design minors.

VIS 147B. Electronic Technologies for Art II (4)
Continuation of the electronics curriculum. Design of programmable microcontroller systems for creating artworks that are able to respond to complex sets of input conditions, perform algorithmic and procedural processing, and generate real time output. Program or materials fees may apply. Purchase of components kit required. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 147A. Open to media, studio, ICAM, and speculative design majors.

VIS 148. Visualizing Art Practice (4)
Artistic practice is a site of critical intervention. Through individual “Practice Diagrams,” students will visualize the issues, motivations, positions, and procedures that inspire and problematize their work, seeking to discover and mobilize new tools, spaces of research, and media experimentation. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 149. Seminar in Contemporary Computer Topics (4)
Topics relevant to computer-based art and music making, such as computer methods for making art/music, design of interactive systems, spatialization of visual/musical elements, critical studies. Topics will vary. May be taken for credit three times. Recommended preparation: VIS 145A or MUS 171. Program or materials fees may apply. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Open to media, studio, ICAM, and speculative design majors and ICAM and speculative design minors.

VIS 150. Landmarks of World Cinema (4)
A survey course on the most significant works of world cinema. Styles, genres, and national cinemas will be examined in comparative relation. Emphasis will be placed on collective film viewing, in-class discussion, and formal and/or narrative analysis. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 150A. Seminar in Film History and Theory (4)
Research seminar in film history, theory, and/or criticism. Potential topics: film aesthetics, film criticism, film sound, and film in the digital era, with a focus on a specific period, theme, or context. Class will be devoted to discussion of readings in connection with a film or related art, fiction, or other media. Students will gain advanced knowledge of a specialized aspect of film history, theory, or criticism in a setting that promotes research, reports, and writing. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: VIS 83 or VIS 84 or VIS 85A.

VIS 151. Experimental Cinema (4)
An inquiry into a specialized alternative history of film, consisting of experimental works made outside the conventions of the movie industry that are closer in their style and nature to experimental work in painting, poetry, the sciences, etc., than to the mainstream theatrical cinema. Materials fees required. Prerequisites: VIS 22 or VIS 83 or VIS 84 or VIS 85A or VIS 159.

VIS 151A. Seminar in Media History and Theory (4)
Research seminar in media history, theory, and/or criticism. Potential topics: digital media aesthetics, television or radio, new media, theory of photography and/or other image forms in digital era. Focus on a specific period, theme, or context. Class devoted to discussion of readings in connection with viewing of media and related forms. Students will gain advanced knowledge of a specialized aspect of media history, theory, or criticism in a setting that promotes research, reports, and writing. Prerequisites: VIS 22 or VIS 83 or VIS 84 or VIS 85A or VIS 159.

VIS 152. Media in Social Context (4)
This collection of courses gathers photography or films that are strongly marked by period, geography, and the culture within which they received their dominating local quality. These courses pay particular attention to the stamp of place—climate, dress, habitation, language, music, politics—as well as the formal and conceptual moves that helped shape such works. The series takes in these works in relation to current thought. Specific topics to be covered will vary by instructor. May be taken up to two times for credit. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: VIS 83 or VIS 84.

VIS 152D. Identity through Transnational Cinemas (4)
Transnational Cinemas examine how US identities and film cultures have been forged through stories of exile, diaspora, and racial and sexual discrimination as well as cultural conflicts that have resonated here and abroad in the global film and media culture of the last century. Program or materials fees may apply. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 155. Media Artists at Work (4)
Examines the work of a single creative individual, team, or group working in any area of media. May focus on a director, an editor, a photographer, a cameraperson, a set designer, a sound producer, or other category, considering the aesthetic, social, political, and/or historical aspects of the body of work and, if relevant, a broader sphere of creative production. Topics to be covered will vary by instructor. May be taken up to two times for credit. Materials fees required. Prerequisites: VIS 83 or VIS 84 or VIS 85A.

VIS 156. Latino American Cinema (4)
This course introduces students to the developing history of cinema in the Latin American region. It explores the multiple authors and film movements that engage cinema as an art form in relation to issues of modernization, development, and political and social crisis. It will regard the history of cinema in the subcontinent as a force generating important cultural transformations within the complex, conflictual processes of modernization. Students may not receive credit for both VIS 156 and VIS 125F. Prerequisites: VIS 84.

VIS 157. Environmentalism in Arts and Media (4)
With attention to the ecology of Southern California and selected sites beyond, this course addresses historical and contemporary debates on environmental politics from the critical perspective of aesthetic practitioners, activists, and scholars from the 1960s to today. Art and media historical approaches will be offset by hands-on assignments, excursions, and the development of site-specific and creative works in all media. Program or materials fee may apply. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 157D. US Civil Rights in Art and Media (4)
Examination of the role of art and media in the civil rights movement in the U.S. Course explores the work of artists, filmmakers, and activists who critically intervened in social and political history in the postwar period. Examines mass media and telecommunication’s representation of political dissent—cross-cultural and ethnic exchange—across narrative cinema, televisual reportage, and exhibitionary practice. Attention on aesthetic and political documents, imagery, and methods which persist to present day. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 158A. Topics in Contemporary Photography (4)
Current topics of debate in art and documentary photography will be explored through the study of contemporary exhibitions, artist books, publications, and theory. We may also focus on the practice of a select few contemporary photographers to consider the aesthetic/political/social aspects of their work and their impacts on the field of cultural production. The class will include visits to local museums and art spaces when photo exhibitions are on view. Prerequisites: VIS 60 or VIS 83.

VIS 158B. Photography after 1960 (4)
A survey course on the history of photography from 1960 until the present. Students will examine the political and aesthetic stakes of the medium—its conceptual trends and postwar globalization—in the wake of World War II and independence movements in the Global South. Special emphasis will be placed on theoretical and cultural positions which address photography as a medium of multitudes, appropriation, criticality, and identity. Prerequisites: VIS 22 or VIS 83.

VIS 158C. History of Social Documentary (4)
This course will examine the history of social documentary photography and film with a primary focus on North America and Europe. We will explore the initial emergence of a social documentary impulse in conjunction with social and political movements during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the expansion of social documentary during the 1930s and its resurgence again during the 1960s and 70s, as well as more contemporary manifestations. Prerequisites: VIS 22 or VIS 83.

VIS 158D. Black Subjects and Black Material in Photography (4)
Thematic course asks how modernity’s concept of blackness might be bound to the emergence of photographic technologies and the trajectory and futures of Black peoples. Explores blackness as a fundamental element of photographic viewing—Black subjects as constituted within systems of political power and Black and queer subjectivities as places to locate contemporary critique. Investigations of these ideas will cover historical and contemporary photo media including art documentary and vernacular imagery. Prerequisites: VIS 60 or VIS 83.

VIS 159. History of Art and Technology (4)
Aims to provide historical context for computer arts by examining the interaction between the arts, media technologies, and sciences in different historical periods. Topics vary (e.g., Renaissance perspective, futurism and technology, and computer art of the 1950s and 1960s). Materials fees required. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.

VIS 160A. Senior Project in Computing Arts I (4)
Students pursue projects of their own design over two quarters with support from faculty in a seminar environment. Project proposals are developed, informed by project development guidelines from real-world examples. Two production-course limitation. Renumbered from ICAM 160A. Students may receive credit for only one of the following: VIS 160A, MUS 160A, or ICAM 160A. Prerequisites: VIS 145A and one course from VIS 141B or VIS 145B or VIS 147B or MUS 172. Open to ICAM majors only. Department stamp required.

VIS 160B. Senior Project in Computing Arts II (4)
Continuation of VIS 160A or MUS 160A. Completion and presentation of independent projects along with documentation. Two production-course limitation. Renumbered from ICAM 160B. Students may receive credit for only one of the following: VIS 160B, MUS 160B, or ICAM 160B. Prerequisites: VIS 160A or MUS 160A. Open to ICAM majors only.

VIS 161. Systems and Networks at Scale (4)
This course introduces students to the study and design of complex systems and networks at diverse scales, from the nanometric to the planetary (and perhaps beyond). Systems and networks are understood as both physical and conceptual organizations of tangible and intangible actors. These include architectural and urban systems, information and interactive systems, diagrammatic and performative systems, and political and geopolitical systems. Prerequisites: VIS 135.

VIS 162. Speculative Science and Design Invention (4)
The course seeks to introduce ways of thinking about and working across the scientific laboratory and the artist's and designer's studio. It explores intersections of research in art/design and science/technology. The course may focus on a specific laboratory method, innovation, or a longer-term enduring challenge. At the discretion of the professor, course may be conducted in direct collaborations with other campus laboratories and research units. Prerequisites: VIS 135.

VIS 163. Design Research and Criticism (4)
Course examines critical topics in design theory, epistemology, research, and criticism. Students develop original critical and theoretical discourse. Topics may be drawn from design theory and criticism, philosophy of technology, architectural theory and design, speculative fiction, bioethics, the human and nonhuman body, urbanism, environmentalism, critical geography studies, political philosophy of materialism, artificial intelligence, robotics, and critical engineering studies. Prerequisites: VIS 30 or VIS 41.

VIS 164. Photographic Strategies: Looking and Seeing (4)
Course guides students in the discovery of the possibilities for making new work within specific photographic restrictions. Photography is approached through experimentation, failure, breakthroughs, and inspiration. We will explore ways of thinking and producing, cultivating a rigorous process for students to develop a meaningful way of making their work. The construction of sequences, series, and the art of editing will be an important part of this critique-based course. Program or materials fees may apply. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 60. Open to art history and criticism, media, studio, and ICAM majors and photography minors.

VIS 165. Black and White Darkroom (4)
This course will introduce the students to the history of chemical and ocular processes since the late nineteenth century and their impact on image making. Students will learn basic black-and-white darkroom techniques, processing film, proofing, and printing. Course will conclude with a primer in the new photographic hybridity, bringing analog into the digital terrain. Students will be required to create a portfolio of work. Program or materials fees may apply. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 60. Open to art history and criticism, media, studio, and ICAM majors and photography minors.

VIS 165A. The Photographic Print (4)
This course continues the student’s work of photographic printing with digital technology, with regard to the potentials of various print media and the way in which printing, editing, and sequence contribute to making meaning. Through demonstrations and workshops, lessons will include inkjet printing, alternative materials, scanning, and digital output of film. Students will be required to create a portfolio of prints. Program or materials fees may apply. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 60. Open to art history and criticism, media, studio, and ICAM majors and photography minors.

VIS 165B. The Photographer’s Studio (4)
This course introduces students to the techniques and equipment for studio and/or composed photography utilizing natural lighting on location and strobe and hot lighting in the studio. Genres within studio photography like portraiture and still life will be covered through lectures, demonstrations, workshops, and assignment prompts. Program or materials fees may apply. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 60. Open to art history and criticism, media, studio, and ICAM majors and photography minors.

VIS 167. Social Engagement and Photography (4)
This course will explore the use of photography as a tool to both understand and represent the social world. Students will look critically at the historical claims of photography as evidence and as a tool of empirical knowledge and engage with the ethics of care and responsibility bound to visual representation. Students will develop a photo-based project that engages the social in a creative and critical way. Program or materials fees may apply. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 164 or VIS 165. Open to media, studio, and ICAM majors and photography minors.

VIS 168. Pictorialism and Constructed Reality (4)
This course will explore photography as art and its long and complicated relationship with painting. Students will learn and be encouraged to experiment with the medium formally and conceptually. From studio and lighting techniques to collage, montage, constructed realities, installations, and projections. Program or materials fees may apply. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 164 or VIS 165. Open to media, studio, and ICAM majors and photography minors.

VIS 169A. Photography in Exhibition and Artist Books (4)
Focus on the preparation of photography for exhibition, including artist books, portfolios, or experimental and hybrid forms. How does exhibition and publishing contribute to the meaning and reception of photo-based work? Class includes workshops on file finishing and printing, framing, zine and artist bookmaking, and more. Students will visit exhibits in the San Diego-Los Angeles area. Students should have work-in-progress to examine. Program or materials fees may apply. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 165 or VIS 165A or VIS 165B. Open to media, studio, and ICAM majors and photography and digital film production minors.

VIS 169B. Advanced Photographic Print (4)
This course explores both material and conceptual analog photography practices and advanced darkroom techniques. Students are encouraged to pursue experimental chemical and optical photographic processes including cyanotypes and chemigrams, multiple exposure, medium and large format, and hybrid photo media. Students will be required to create a portfolio of work. Program or materials fees may apply. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 165 or VIS 165A or VIS 165B. Open to media, studio, and ICAM majors and photography and digital film production minors.

VIS 171. Digital Cinema: Theory and Practice (4)
A digital image is not a film image, and this reality and its technological and conceptual implications are what this course will attempt to map out, exploring its possibilities and the massive overhaul of media aesthetics it implies. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 174. Open to media majors and film production minors only.

VIS 172. Motion Design and Visual Effects (4)
Artists and filmmakers have been visualizing the impossible since the inception of motion pictures and photography. Motion design and visual effects allow artists to interrupt reality, instead presenting ingenious illusions that propel and inspire our imaginations. Students will learn foundational motion graphics and visual effects strategies and theories, including image compositing, matte design, and fundamentals of 3D modeling and animation. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 174. Open to media majors and film production minors only.

VIS 174. Media Sketchbook (4)
Video medium used both as production technology and as device to explore the fundamental character of filmmaking and time-based computer art practices. Students perform all aspects of production with attention to developing ideas and building analytical/critical skills. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 70N. Open to media, studio, ICAM, and speculative design majors; and film production and speculative design minors.

VIS 175. Editing: Theory and Practice (4)
The evolving aims and grammars of editing practice in film and digital media will be examined. These histories will create a context for exploring contemporary editing strategies. The production projects will be centered on digital editing practice. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 174. Open to media majors and film production minors.

VIS 176. 16mm Filmmaking (4)
A technical foundation and creative theoretical context for film production will be provided. Students will produce a short film with post-synchronized sounds and final mixed-track. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 174. Open to media majors and film production minors.

VIS 177. Scripting Strategies (4)
Script writing, reading, and analysis of traditional and experimental media productions. The emphasis will be on the structural character of the scripting process and its language. Students will write several short scripts along with analytical papers. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 174. Open to media majors and film production minors.

VIS 178. Sound: Theory and Practice (4)
Sound design is an essential component of media production and has opened up new structural possibilities for creative strategies in media arts. Students will encounter a critical and historical review of sound art, design, and production methodology. Critical papers and sound work for short projects will be required. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 174. Open to media and speculative design majors and film production minors.

VIS 179. Intermediate Projects in Media (4)
Topic based production course for media students with topics relevant to photography, video, film, and sound. Specific content will vary each quarter. May be taken for credit two times. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 174. Open to media and speculative design majors and film production minors.

VIS 180A. Documentary Evidence and the Construction of Authenticity in Current Media Practices (4)
Documentary may be the most maligned form, yet the most compelling filmic way, that we know about the world. This is a senior production course where students will create a short form documentary. It will include the exploration of concepts in representational artworks by critically examining “found” vs. “made” recorded material. Advanced film/video, photography, computing work. Issues of narrative and structure; attention to formal aspects of media work emphasized. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 174 and two from VIS 164, 165, 165A, 165B, 171, 172, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179. Open to media majors only.

VIS 180B. Fiction and Allegory in Current Media Practices (4)
Course that theoretically and technically parses out how we create meaning through storytelling. How is history implicated in our experience of watching fiction? How does this affect the way that we create as artists? Students will examine the connection between the contrived and the real and language’s place in this cycle. There are both group-based and individual projects produced in this class around these issues. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 174 and two from VIS 164, 165, 165A, 165B, 171, 172, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179. Open to media majors only.

VIS 181. Advanced Sound and Lighting (4)
Advanced course to gain sophisticated control of lighting and sound recording techniques with understanding of theoretical implications and interrelation between production values and subject matter. Interactions between sound and image in various works in film, video, or installation. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 174 and two from VIS 164, 165, 165A, 165B, 171, 172, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179. Open to media majors only.

VIS 182. Advanced Editing (4)
Film/video editing and problems of editing from theoretical and practical points-of-view. Films and tapes analyzed on a frame-by-frame, shot-by-shot basis. Edit stock material and generate own materials for editing final project. Aesthetic and technical similarities/differences of film/video. Recommended preparation: VIS 175 Editing-Theory and Production strongly recommended. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 174 and two from VIS 164, 165, 165A, 165B, 171, 172, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179. Open to media majors only.

VIS 182A. Advanced Digital Photography Editing (4)
Approaching digital editing from a theoretical perspective. How does manipulation work with and against claims of truth in photography? How have artists used image manipulation toward conceptual means? Students will learn advanced editing techniques in Photoshop while learning about the political, social, and personal implications of the altered image landscape. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 174 and two from VIS 164, 165, 165A, 165B, 171, 172, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179. Open to media majors only.

VIS 183A. Strategies of Self (4)
Looks at the way that self-identity is reflected and produced through various media practices. Focus is on rhetorical strategies of biography and autobiography in media, comparing and contrasting these strategies with those drawn from related cultural forms. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 174 and two from VIS 164, 165, 165A, 165B, 171, 172, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179. Open to media majors only.

VIS 183B. Strategies of Alterity (4)
An advanced production course which emphasizes how artists and filmmakers approach “otherness” and “difference” as it is constructed in various media practices. Course will examine a wide range of forms and genres such as ethnography, science fiction, crime narratives, documentary film, and animated shorts. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 174 and two from VIS 164, 165, 165A, 165B, 171, 172, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179. Open to media majors only.

VIS 184. Advanced Scripting (4)
Film/video production will be framed through the script writing process, focusing on the problems of longer duration, density, and adaptation from other media. Students will both read and analyze both historical and contemporary scripts and produce a thirty- to sixty-minute script. Recommended preparation: VIS 177 Scripting Strategies. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 174 and two from VIS 164, 165, 165A, 165B, 171, 172, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179. Open to media majors only.

VIS 185. Senior Media Projects (4)
Through instruction and discussion, the class will focus on guiding students through advanced production on a senior project. Students will be expected to initiate and complete production on at least one portfolio-level project. May be taken for credit two times. Two production-course limitation. Prerequisites: VIS 174 and two from VIS 164, 165, 165A, 165B, 171, 172, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179. Open to media majors with senior standing only.

VIS 190. Design Master Studio (8)
This advanced course provides students with a unique immersive learning experience, based on design studio/atelier methods. This course develops students’ skills in the ideation, planning, and execution of complex individual and collaborative projects, including historical and contextual research, project ideation, planning and management, coordination of skills and responsibilities, iterative execution, and effective presentation. Prerequisites: senior standing, VIS 135, and two from VIS 100A, VIS 101A, VIS 133A, VIS 136A, VIS 161, VIS 162.

VIS 194S. Fantasy in Film (4)
This course will explore the path of the deliberately “unreal” in movies. Fantasy in film will be considered in terms of its cultural and creative appearance in motion pictures, looking at imaginary worlds and stories in such genres as science fiction, horror, and musical films. Offered in Summer Session only. Program or materials fees may apply. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: VIS 84.

VIS 196A. Art History Honors Thesis I (4)
This is the first of a two-quarter advanced-level sequence. This sequence coordinates two consecutive independent research courses to culminate in a completed thesis of study in art history. After the thesis completion, the faculty involved in the project will determine whether the student will graduate with departmental honors. Prerequisites: junior or senior standing with faculty consent.

VIS 196B. Art History Honors Thesis II (4)
This is the final of a two-quarter advanced-level sequence. This sequence coordinates two consecutive independent research courses to culminate in a completed thesis of study in art history. After the thesis completion, the faculty involved in the project will determine whether the student will graduate with departmental honors. Prerequisites: VIS 196A.

VIS 197. Media Honors Thesis (4)
This advanced-level sequence coordinates three consecutive independent research courses to culminate in a completed thesis project in the third quarter of study. After the project’s public presentation, the faculty involved in the project will determine whether the student will graduate with departmental honors. Prerequisites: consent of instructor. Note: Requires a written proposal, 3.5 GPA in the major, prior consent from all involved, and approvals by the department chair and provost.

VIS 198. Directed Group Study in Visual Arts (2–4)
Directed group study on a topic or in a group field not included in regular department curriculum, by special arrangement with a faculty member. Prerequisites: consent of instructor. Note: Open only to upper-division students. Requires instructor’s, department chair’s, and provost’s approval. Pass/Not Pass grades only.

VIS 199. Special Studies in the Visual Arts (4)
Independent reading, research, or creative work under direction of a faculty member. Prerequisites: consent of instructor. Note: Open only to upper-division students. Requires instructor’s, department chair’s, and provost’s approval. Pass/Not Pass grades only.

WARR 1. First Year Experience (2)
This course facilitates academic success at a leading research university by helping students understand and embrace academic and curricular expectations, engage and map cocurricular opportunities, and strengthen critical thinking and organizational, interpersonal, and wellness skills. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: open to Warren NFRS students only.

WARR 2. Transfer Year Experience (2)
This course facilitates academic success at a leading research university by helping students understand and embrace academic and curricular expectations, engage and map cocurricular opportunities, and strengthen critical thinking and organizational, interpersonal, and wellness skills. P/NP grades only. Prerequisites: open to Warren College transfer students only.

WCWP 10A. The Writing Course A (4)
A seminar-style course in reading and writing required of all Warren College students. The course emphasizes argumentation and critical writing based on sources. Letter grades only. Prerequisites: satisfaction of the UC Entry Level Writing Requirement and must be a Warren College student.

WCWP 10B. The Writing Course B (4)
A seminar-style course in reading and writing required of all Warren College students who have completed WCWP 10A. The course continues the emphasis on argumentation and critical writing based on sources. Letter grades only. Prerequisites: satisfaction of WCWP 10A and must be a Warren College student.

WCWP 100. Academic Writing for Warren College (4)
An upper-division workshop course in argumentation and research with particular attention to analyzing and constructing academic arguments. A course specially designed for and required of transfer students who enter Warren College through the TAG, IGETC, or another articulation agreement. The course must be taken for a letter grade to fulfill this requirement. Letter grades only. Prerequisites: junior/senior standing and must be a Warren College student.

WCWP 160. Technical Writing for Scientists and Engineers for Warren College (4)
An upper-division workshop-style writing course focused on the principles and practices of scientific and technical writing and communication. Emphasis on the analysis, evaluation, design, and production of technical writing projects in science and engineering courses and context. Open to students from all colleges. Prerequisites: junior/senior standing.

WARR 189. Academic Mentoring and the Writing Process for Warren College (2)
Students will gain a fundamental understanding of all stages of the writing process and will develop the necessary skills to serve as productive mentors for their peers. P/NP grades only. May be taken for credit three times. Prerequisites: permission of instructor is required to enroll.

WCWP 198. Group Study in Warren College (2)
A directed group study involving research and analysis of activities and services in writing, public and civic writing, publishing, and other areas that are not covered by the present curriculum. The course involves reading, writing, and discussion by a small group of students under supervision of a faculty member.